Citation
22 Ill.426 U.S. 668, 96 S. Ct. 2358, 49 L. Ed. 2d 132 (1976)

Brief Fact Summary
In this case Respondent sought to have a parcel of property rezoned from “light industrial” to permit the construction of a high-rise multi-family apartment building. The application for rezoning was in the process of approval when the voters of the City of Eastlake amended the city charter to require land use changes to be ratified by 55% of the voters to become effective.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
As a basic instrument of democratic government, the referendum process does not, in itself, violate the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment when applied to a rezoning ordinance.

Facts
In this case Respondent sought to have a parcel of property rezoned from “light industrial” to permit the construction of a high-rise multi-family apartment building. The application for rezoning was in the process of approval when the voters of the City of Eastlake amended the city charter to require land use changes to be ratified by 55% of the voters to become effective. In May 1971, Respondent applied to the City Planning Commission for a zoning change to permit the construction of the apartment building. The Planning Commission recommended the proposed change to the City Council, which under the old procedures could either accept or reject the Planning Commission’s recommendation. In the meantime, by popular vote, the voters of Eastlake voted to amend the city charter to require 55% voter approval in a referendum before any changes can be made to land use. The City Council approved the Planning Commission’s recommendation for reclassification of Respondent’s property. Res

Issue
Does the city charter provision requiring proposed land use changes to be ratified by 55% of the voters violate the due process rights of a landowner who applies for a zoning change?

Held
No. Reversed.

Dissent
There are two dissents:

Discussion
Note the effect of the “reservation” of the referendum power in the people by the Ohio State Constitution. The entire case turned on that reservation as opposed to delegation. Plus, the Court seemed to be interested in upholding the democratic proc

