Citation
22 Ill.331 N.W.2d 398 (Iowa 1983)

Brief Fact Summary
Plaintiffs bought a tract of land in the City of Wilton (Defendant), for the construction of low-income multi-family housing. At the time of purchase, approximately three-fourths of the land was zoned as multi-family residential. Prior to Plaintiffs’ construction, the city rezoned the entire six acres as single-family residential.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The standard for determining if a property owner has vested rights in a zoning classification is dependent on the type of the project, the location, the ultimate cost, and primarily, the amount of monies expended while the use was in conformity.

Facts
In preparation of building, the Plaintiffs had incurred expenses for architectural fees and engineering services in the preparation of plans and plats to be submitted to the city council. The Plaintiffs also secured a Farmers’ Home Administration (FHA) loan commitment for the project. In December of 1979, Plaintiffs filed a preliminary plat for the project with the city clerk. In March, 1980, following a public meeting, the planning and zoning commission recommended to the city council that land in the northern part of the city be rezoned to single family residential based on alleged inadequacies of sewer, water and electrical services. The rezoning recommendation affected Plaintiffs’ tract. Plaintiffs’ application for a building permit was denied in May, 1980, due to the pending zoning recommendation. Plaintiffs filed a petition seeking a declaratory judgment invalidating the rezoning of their property, temporary and permanent injunctions to prohibit passage of any rezoning o

Issue
Did the Plaintiffs have a vested right in developing their property as subsidized, multi-family housing, which the rezoning ordinance took without just compensation?

Held
No. The decision is affirmed.

Discussion
Note the fluid boundary between expenditures, which are substantial enough under the test and those which fall short. The primary factor in this analysis is the amount of money expended while the land was in conformity.

