Brief Fact Summary
Hungary (D) asserted that the enforcement of a treaty with Slovakia (P) would not be possible because of changes in circumstances.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A successor state will be bound to a bilateral treaty that is territorial in character and that expressly acknowledges the interests of third states.

Facts
In 1977, Hungary (D) and Slovakia (P) agreed to build and operate a system of locks along the Danube River made up of a dam, reservoir, hydroelectric power plant and flood control improvements. This project never saw the light of the day and the two countries went through different changes in their political and economic systems beginning in 1989. Hungary (D) was the first to stop and abandon its part of the works and later give notice of termination of the treaty. In 1992 and based on international law, both countries asked the I.C.J. to decide whether Hungary (D) was entitled to suspend and subsequently abandon its part of the work, on the grounds of the doctrine of impossibility of performance.

Issue
Will a successor state be bound to a bilateral treaty that is territorial in character and that expressly acknowledges the interests of third states?

Held
Yes. A successor state will be bound to a bilateral treaty that is territorial in character and that expressly acknowledges the interests of third states. What is to be determined here is whether Slovakia (D) as a successor state to Czechoslovakia, is a party to the 1977 Treaty entered into between Hungary (P) and Czechoslovakia. Hungary’s (P) claim rested on the fact that the treaty ceased to be in force upon the dissolution of Czechoslovakia since as one of the party to the treaty, as “disappeared” (I.e. Czechoslovakia).

Discussion
Article 12(3) of the Convention stipulates “The provisions of the present article do not apply to treaty obligations of the Predecessor State providing for the establishment of foreign military bases on the territory to which the succession of States relates.” This treaty relates to military bases rather than an international waterway. Slovakia (D) would not have been bound to the treaty as a successor state. This provision makes it clear that military bases, which arguably relates to territory and constitute part of a territorial regime are not intended to be covered by the other provisions of Article 12 relating to “Other Territorial Regimes.”

