Citation
512 U.S. 374,114 S. Ct. 2309, 129 L. Ed. 2d 304,1994 U.S.

Brief Fact Summary
A condition of a permit stated that the landowner had to convey property to the government.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
When a city requires a landowner to convey some property to the city as a condition to obtaining a permit, there must be a rough proportionality between the burdens on the public that would result form granting the permit and the benefit to the public from the conveyance of land.

Facts
Florence Dolan (Petitioner) owned a plumbing and electric supply store and wanted to redevelop the site. The City of Tigard (Respondent) issued her a permit to expand, but it was subject to the condition that Petitioner dedicate a part of her property to the city to be used as a pedestrian/bicycle pathway. The city justified their request because the pathway would help prevent some flooding that would occur from a nearby creek with the expansion and it would also offset some traffic demands. Petitioner says the dedication is a taking of her property.

Issue
Does an impermissible taking of property occur when a city requires a landowner to convey property to the city in order to get a permit to redevelop property?

Held
Yes.

Dissent
(Justice John Paul Stevens) The rough proportionality test runs contrary to the traditional treatment of these cases and breaks considerable and unpropitious new ground. Petitioner’s acceptance of the permit, with its attached conditions, would provide her with benefits that may go beyond any advantage she gets from expanding her business. The analysis should focus on the impact of the city’s action on the entire parcel of private property. The inquiry should instead concentrate on whether the required nexus is present and venture beyond considerations of a condition’s nature only if the developer establishes that a concededly germane condition is so grossly disproportionate to the proposed development’s adverse effects that it manifests motives other than land use regulation on the part of the city.<br />	(Justice David Souter) The Court has places the burden of producing evidence of relationship on the city, despite the usual rule in cases involving the police power that the government is presumed to have acted constitutionally.<br />

Discussion
When the government enacts land regulations, there must be a close fit between the land use regulation and the objective sought to be fulfilled by the government.

