Brief Fact Summary
Turkey’s (D) assertion of jurisdiction over a French citizen who had been the first officer of a ship that collided with a Turkish ship on the high seas was challenged by France (P) as a violation of international law.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A rule of international law, which prohibits a state from exercising criminal jurisdiction over a foreign national who commits acts outside of the state’s national jurisdiction, does not exist.

Facts
A collision occurred shortly before midnight on the 2nd of August 1926 between the French (P) mail steamer Lotus and the Turkish (D) collier Boz-Kourt. The French mail steamer was captained by a French citizen by the name Demons while the Turkish collier Boz-Kourt was captained by Hassan Bey. The Turks lost eight men after their ship cut into two and sank as a result of the collision.

Issue
Issue: Does a rule of international law which prohibits a state from  exercising criminal jurisdiction over a foreign national who commits  acts outside of the state’s national jurisdiction exist?

Held
(Per curiam) No. A rule of international law, which prohibits a state from exercising criminal jurisdiction over a foreign national who commits acts outside of the state’s national jurisdiction, does not exist. Failing the existence of a permissive rule to the contrary is the first and foremost restriction imposed by international law on a state and it may not exercise its power in any form in the territory of another state.

Discussion
In 1975, France enacted a law regarding its criminal jurisdiction over aliens because of this the situation surrounding this case. The law stipulates that aliens who commit a crime outside the territory of the Republic may be prosecuted and judged pursuant to French law, when the victim is of French nationality. This is contained in 102 Journal Du Droit International 962 (Clunet 1975). Several eminent scholars have criticized the holding in this case for seeming to imply that international law permits all that it does not forbid.

