Citation
64 N.Y.2d 152, 474 N.E.2d 567, 485 N.Y.S.2d 207, 1984 N.Y. 4916.

Brief Fact Summary
After abusing her, Defendant’s wife obtained an order of protection against him which specified he had to stay away from her and move out of the home. The lower court order provided he could see his son once a week. Defendant then raped his wife after luring her to his motel room. Defendant was convicted of rape and the conviction was affirmed by the Appellate Division.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The marital exemption included in the rape statute violates the Equal Protection Clause of both the federal (Fourteenth Amendment) and state constitutions because it lacks a rational basis and is unconstitutionally underinclusive.

Facts
Defendant Mario Liberta and victim Denise Liberta were married in 1978. Shortly after the birth of their son, Defendant began beating his wife. In 1980, Denise obtained an order of protection from the Defendant, whereby Defendant had to move out of the family home and stay away from Denise. The order allowed Defendant to visit his son once each weekend. In March of 1981, Defendant called Denise and asked her if he could visit their son. Denise allowed Defendant to pick up both her and their son and take them back to his motel after being assured that a friend of his would be with them at all times. Once they arrived, the friend left and Defendant forced Denise to have sexual intercourse with him. He also forced his son to watch the non-consensual intercourse. Thereafter, Denise filed a complaint against Defendant and he was eventually convicted of rape. The conviction was affirmed by the Appellate Division. Section 130.35 of the Penal Code provides that “a male is guilty of ra

Issue
Does the marital exemption violate the Equal Protection Clause of both the federal (Fourteenth Amendment) and state Constitutions?

Held
Yes. Conviction affirmed.

Discussion
In striking down the marital exemption, the Court reasoned that a marriage license should not be viewed as a license for a husband to forcibly rape his wife. Furthermore, the Court found that nowhere in modern society is a woman regarded as chattel.

