Citation
231 Cal. App. 3d 1654, 283 Cal. Rptr. 231, 1991 Cal. App. 91 Cal. Daily Op. Service 5509

Brief Fact Summary
The Plaintiff, Lick Mill Creek Apartments (Plaintiff), discovered hazardous materials that they were required to clean up after purchase of the land. Plaintiff sued the Defendant, Chicago Title Insurance Co. (Defendant), on a theory that they were liable because the hazardous materials constituted an encumbrance on the land and thus affected the marketability of title.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Hazardous materials located on land relate to the condition of the land and not the marketability of the title unless there is an encumbrance on the land with respect to the hazardous materials.

Facts
In 1986, Plaintiff acquired the land in question. Prior to 1986, the land had been used by various corporations, which had deposited large amounts of hazardous materials in underground tanks. Plaintiff retained the Defendant for title insurance. The Defendant commissioned a survey and inspection of the property. During the survey, the survey company noticed the presence of pipes and tanks. Further, the Department of Health Services and the Regional Water Control Board maintained records disclosing the hazardous materials. Plaintiff filed suit to recover costs incurred in cleaning up the hazardous substances. Plaintiff appealed from the trial court’s dismissal of their claim based on a finding that the title insurance did not cover removing hazardous waste.

Issue
Whether hazardous materials affect the marketability of the title or act as an encumbrance on the land, which would allow for Plaintiff to recover under the title insurance contract.

Held
Affirmed. Hazardous materials do not constitute an encumbrance on the land, nor affect the marketability of the land. Thus, Plaintiff cannot recover from Defendant under the title insurance coverage.

Discussion
The court started its analysis by referring to the contractual obligations of both parties.

