Citation
131 S. Ct. 95; 178 L. Ed. 2d 60; 2010 U.S.79 U.S.L.W. 3197

Brief Fact Summary
When buying a house, a couple was told that problems in the house had been corrected, but after they bought it, heavy water leaks occurred after a rainstorm.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
When the seller of a home knows of facts materially affecting the value of the property, which are not readily observable and are not known to the buyer, the seller is under a duty to disclose them to the buyer. This duty is applicable to both new and used real property.

Facts
The Davises (Plaintiffs) entered into a contract with the Johnsons (Defendants) to buy Defendants’ home. Before the final deposit was made, Plaintiffs noticed small damage around a window frame and stains on the ceiling. Defendants told Plaintiff that there had been a minor problem but had been fixed long ago, which were glue stains, and were the result of ceiling beams being moved. Plaintiffs paid the final deposit and Defendants moved out. A heavy rain occurred, and water leaked from around the window frame, the ceiling of the family room, the light fixtures, the glass doors, and the kitchen stove. A new roof would be very expensive. Plaintiffs filed suit, alleging breach of contract, fraud, and misrepresentation, and sought rescission of the contract and return of their deposit. Defendants sought liquidated damages.

Issue
If a seller knows material defects exist in the property being sold, must he disclose this knowledge to a potential buyer?

Held
Yes.

Dissent
This ruling will give rise to a flood of litigation. If change is to come, it should come from the legislature. Sellers of homes usually do not know better than a buyer the quality of their house. A buyer has an equal opportunity to learn of all material information if he is not prevented by the seller from doing so. A prudent purchaser will inspect property before agreeing to buy.

Discussion
Had the buyers known of the rook leaks, that knowledge might have induced them to not go through with the deal. Buyers have the right to know about conditions that might affect the terms of the transaction.

