Citation
363 Fed. Appx. 80

Brief Fact Summary
Robert Wendland (Conservetee) was in a car accident that left him conscious but severely physically and mentally disabled. Conservator wife, Rose Wendland (Conservator), sought permission to have Conservetee’s feeding tube removed. Conservetee’s mother and sister objected.<span class="heading">Synopsis of Rule of Law.</span> If a conservator seeks to remove life sustaining treatment for a conservetee, she must prove by clear and convincing evidence that the conservetee wished to refuse life-sustaining treatment or that to withhold such treatment would have been in the conservetee’s best interest.

Facts
Conservetee rolled his truck at high speed in a solo car accident. As a result of the accident, Conservetee was left severely impaired both physically and mentally. Throughout the treatment of Conservetee, Conservator visited him daily, often accompanied by their children, and authorized treatment as necessary to maintain Conservatee’s health. Conservator had authorized three surgical procedures to fix the placement Conservetee’s feeding tube. When requested to approve a fourth operation, Conservator sought the opinion of Conservetee’s brother, her daughter, and Conservetee’s physicians. After refelction, Conservator determined that Conservetee would have not wanted anymore life sustaining measures to be taken. Conservator sought approval from the court to have the feeding tube removed and to let Conservetee die. Conservator presented evidence, attested to be Conservetee’s brother and daughter, that Conservetee would not have wanted to stay alive given his conditions. Conserve

Issue
If a conservator seeks to remove life sustaining treatment for a conservetee, must she prove by clear and convincing evidence that the conservetee wished to refuse life-sustaining treatment or that to withhold such treatment would have been in the conservetee’s best interest?

Held
Yes. If a conservator seeks to remove life sustaining treatment for a conservetee, she must prove by clear and convincing evidence that the conservetee wished to refuse life-sustaining treatment or that to withhold such treatment would have been in the conservetee’s best interest. This interpretation is in accord with California state law pertaining to the removal of life sustaining treatment for a conscious conservetee who is not terminally ill, comatose, or in a persistent vegetative state, and who has not left formal instructions for health care or appointed an agent or surrogate for health care decisions. Competent adults have the right to refuse medical treatment, even that which would sustain life. These same adults have the right to delegate to another trusted individual a healthcare proxy based upon their desired disposition should tragedy strike. A conservator, however, unlike an appointed healthcare proxy, is appointed by the Court to care for the best wishes of the c

Discussion
The issues presented in this case are both legally and medically complex. Because of the increased use of end-of-life life sustaining medical treatments, these issues are increasingly relevant. The United States Supreme Court has ruled that a state has an interest in maintaining life, and so conservators arguing for the removal of life sustaining treatment must overcome this interest in order to have a Court approve the desired action.

