Citation
531 U.S. 1027, 121 S. Ct. 600, 148 L. Ed. 2d 513 (2000)

Brief Fact Summary
The United States District Court for the District of Maryland submitted to the Supreme Court of Nevada a certification order requesting the court to answer certain questions related to the negligently caused unwanted birth of a child, who suffered birth defects.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Medical malpractice, like other forms of negligence, involves a breach of duty which causes injury. To be tortiously liable a physician must have departed from the accepted standard of medical care in a manner that results in injury to a patient.

Facts
The Grecos (Plaintiff), mother and child, sought damages in an action alleging negligence on the part of physicians who, they contended, failed to detect prenatal defects and anomalies. Their purported negligence, Plaintiffs asserted, denied Greco the opportunity to terminate her pregnancy and avoid the birth of a deformed and unwanted child. On behalf of the child, the mother brought a “wrongful life” action claiming that the denial of right to terminate resulted in the child’s life of abnormality, pain and deprivation.

Issue
May a plaintiff bring a medical malpractice claim when physicians failed to inform her of birth defects in her unborn fetus thus denying her the opportunity to terminate her pregnancy?

Held
The court held that the malpractice complaint had a claim for negligent malpractice, but she did not have a complaint on behalf of her minor child for wrongful life.

Discussion
Several jurisdictions have upheld wrongful birth claims where physicians have failed to warn expectant parents that the fetus was in genetic difficulty. The standard employed is the plaintiff’s showing the defendant’s negligent failure to diagnose the condition that gave rise to the birth defect deprived the plaintiff the opportunity to terminate the pregnancy. In contrast, a wrongful life action is an action, brought by parents on behalf of the infant born in an impaired condition, claiming, in essence, that being born was the injury. The court in Greco was not yet prepared to do so: “[i]mplicit in [the wrongful life claim] is the assumption that the child would be better off if he had never been born. These kinds of judgments are very difficult if not impossible to make.”

