Citation
401 U.S. 402, 91 S. Ct. 814, 28 L. Ed. 2d 136, 2 ERC 1250 (1971)

Brief Fact Summary
Two statutes enacted by Congress to curb destruction of the country’s natural resources prohibited the Secretary of Transportation (Secretary) from authorizing the use of federal funds to finance the construction of highways through public parks if there was a “feasible and prudent” alternative route. The Secretary approved route I-40 being built through Overton Park, and a group of citizens and conservation groups (Petitioners) contended that the Secretary violated the statutes.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
APA Section:706 required the court to decide: 1] whether the Secretary acted within the scope of his authority; 2] whether the choice made was “arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with law;” and 3] whether the Secretary’s action followed the necessary procedural requirements.

Facts
I-40, the proposed six-lane highway, was to cut through Overton Park, a 342-acre city park located near Memphis, Tennessee. The path of the road would sever the zoo from the rest of the park. Petitioners contended that the Secretary’s announced approval of the road was invalid because he did not indicate why he believed there were no feasible and prudent alternative routes. In District Court, the Respondents argued that the Secretary did not have to make formal findings, and introduced affidavits specifically prepared for litigation to support the Secretary’s decision. The District Court and the Court of Appeals held that formal findings by the Secretary were not necessary, and refused to probe the mental processes of an administrative decisionmaker. Believing the Secretary’s authority wide and the reviewing courts’ narrow, they held that the affidavits contained no basis for a determination that the Secretary exceeded his authority.

Issue
Were formal findings required?  Was judicial review based solely on affidavits adequate?

Held
Remanded to the District Court for plenary review of the Secretary’s decision.   No, formal findings were not required under APA Section:706.  A finding based solely on affidavits prepared for trial was insufficient. The review on remand was to be based on the whole administrative record that was before the Secretary at the time he made his decision.   Dissent. None.  Concurrence. (Labeled “Separate Opinion”)    The Court of Appeals decision was wrong, but the case should go back to the Secretary of Transportation, rather than the District Court, to hold hearings on the topic before making a determination.

Discussion
This case pointed toward procedural requirements in informal adjudication that are not specified in the APA. The United States Supreme Court was less deferential to agency administrators than the lower courts.   Motor Vehicle Manufacturers Ass’n of the US v. State Farm Mutual Automobile Ins. Co.  <b>Citation.</b> 463 U.S. 29 (1983)

Brief Fact Summary
The Department of Transportation (DOT) issued Standard 208 in 1967, requiring the installation of seatbelts in all automobiles. It later revised Standard 208 to require passive restraint systems (that do not depend on any action by the occupant for effectiveness), changed the requirement several times, and then rescinded the passive restraint requirement in 1982. State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Company and the National Association of Independent Insurers (Petitioners) filed suit in the D.C. Circuit for review of the rescission standard.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The scope of review under the “arbitrary and capricious” standard is narrow, and a court is not to substitute its judgment for that of the agency. Nevertheless, the agency must examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation for its action, including a “rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.”

Facts
The National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966 (Act) directed the Secretary to issue motor vehicle standards that “shall be practicable, shall meet the need for motor vehicle safety, and shall be stated in objective terms.” The Secretary issued Standard 208 in 1967, requiring the installation of seatbelts in all automobiles, and later amended it to require passive restraint systems. After going back and forth for many years, it issued a final rule (Notice 25) rescinding the passive restraint requirement contained in Modified Standard 208. The basis NHTSA offered for its rescission was that it was no longer able to find that passive restraints would produce significant safety benefits, due, not to a change in opinion of the effectiveness in technology, but in plans by the automobile industry. Since manufacturers planned to install automatic safety belts in 99% of new cars, the lifesaving potential of airbags would not be realized. Further, NHTSA concluded that the majority of passive restraints installed by manufacturers could be easily and permanently detached. Petitioners claimed that NHTSA’s basis for the rescission was arbitrary and capricious.

Issue
Did NHTSA act arbitrarily and capriciously in revoking the Standard 208 requirement that new motor vehicles produced after September, 1982 be equipped with passive restraints to protect the safety of occupants of the vehicle in the event of a collision?

