Citation
401 U.S. 371,91 S. Ct. 780,28 L. Ed. 2d 113,1971 U.S.

Brief Fact Summary
Appellants brought suit challenging the constitutionality of a statute requiring a fee to procure a divorce.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Due process prohibits a State from denying, solely because of inability to pay, access to its courts to individuals who seek judicial dissolution of their marriages.  This is due to the basic position of the marriage relationship in society’s hierarchy of values and the concomitant state monopolization of the means for legally dissolving this relationship.

Facts
Appellants, welfare recipients residing in Connecticut, brought suit challenging requirements for payment of court fees and costs for service of process that restrict their access to the courts when bringing an action for divorce.  The average cost for divorce was $60, with $45 to court costs and $15 for service of process by sheriff.  There was no dispute as to the inability of the appellants to pay the fees.  A three judge court found the statute constitutional.

Issue
Is the denial of appellants’ right to a court proceeding in which they may obtain a divorce a denial of appellants’ due process rights under the United States Constitution?

Held
Due process prohibits a State from denying, solely because of inability to pay, access to its courts to individuals who seek judicial dissolution of their marriages.

Concurrence
The majority’s reliance on due process could result in unending expansion of constitutional rights to be heard in court.  The present constitutional violation is better analyzed as a violation of the Equal Protection Clause.

Discussion
The majority likens the appellants’ resort to the judicial process in this case to a criminal defendant called upon to defend his interests in court because the settlement technique is the only one available.  The concurrence worries that this analysis would invalid many other laws, such as a fee for obtaining a fishing license.

