Citation
731 So. 2d 1237,1999 Fla.24 Fla. L. Weekly S 83

Brief Fact Summary
Dunagan represented a married couple in various business transactions, then represented the husband against the wife in a divorce proceeding.  Wife sued for malpractice, and Dunagan sought review of a referree’s findings and recommendation against him.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A lawyer who has formerly represented a client is prohibited from representing another person in the same or a substantially related matter where that person’s interests are materially adverse to the former client’s interests.  This rule may be avoided by obtaining informed consent from the former client.

Facts
In 1992 Attorney Dunagan prepared a bill of sale purporting to transfer assets of a restaurant, “Biscuits ‘N’ Gravy ‘N’ More” (B&G) to the joint ownership of William and Paula Leucht.  Subsequently a commercial lease dispute arose concerning the restaurant.  Dunagan represented B&G and the Leuchts in the action and moved to dismiss Paula as an improper party to the suit because he had inadvertently omitted her name on a registration form.  Dunagan was also involved in various other negotiations and suits representing B&G and the Leuchts.  In 1996 Dunagan sent a letter to the police and city attorney stating that he represented William Leucht, that Leucht was the sole owner of B&G, and that although there as a bill of sale that considered putting the business in the name of William and Paula, it was determined that William would remain the sole owner.  It further advised that William intended to fire two employees, and that they would no longer be welcome on the premises of the

Issue
Did the referee err in finding that Dunagan’s representation of William in the divorce proceeding after having represented the couple in matters relating to their business presented a conflict of interest? Did the referee err in finding that Paula did not consent to Dunagan’s representation of William? Did the referee err in concluding that Dunagan’s letters to the police and city attorney violated rule 4-1.9(b)? Ws the recommended discipline of a ninety-one-day suspension too harsh?

Held
The findings of the referee where appropriate.

Discussion
This case provides a description of when an attorney may violate conflict of interest rules by representing a client in a divorce proceeding when the attorney has represented the adverse party in a substantially related matter.

