Citation
221 A.D.2d 73,646 N.Y.S.2d 315,1996 N.Y. App. Div.

Brief Fact Summary
Plaintiff brought suit for divorce based on abandonment.  Defendant responded that her claim of abandonment was precluded because of a brief attempt at reconciliation.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
An attempt at reconciliation does not preclude entry of a valid claim for abandonment as a matter of law.

Facts
Gail Haymes, plaintiff, alleged in divorce proceedings that beginning in 1984 defendant, Stephen Haymes, refused to have sexual relations with her.  In 1987 defendant moved out without plaintiff’s consent or justification.  Plaintiff claimed that defendant engaged in several adulterous relationships.  In 1988 an action for divorce was commenced.  The couple attempted reconciliation between November 1988 and January 1989.  According to plaintiff, defendant neither expressed remorse for his adultery nor affection for her during this time.  In January 1995 on the eve of trial, defendant moved for dismissal of his wife’s causes of action for abandonment and constructive abandonment.  He asserted that her claims were precluded because of plaintiff’s admission that she and her husband had briefly resumed living together.  She also conceded that the couple had engaged in sexual relations at least once during this period.  Plaintiff responded that a single unsuccessful attempt at reco

Issue
Does a relatively brief attempt at reconciliation require plaintiff to forfeit an otherwise facially valid cause of action for divorce.

Held
An estranged couple’s attempt at reconciliation, even where it involves brief and isolated resumption of cohabitation and/or sexual relations, after a matrimonial action has been commenced does not, as a matter of law, preclude entry of judgment in favor of the spouse who originally had an otherwise valid claim for abandonment.

Discussion
The Court found that the plaintiff’s claim of abandonment was not precluded as a matter of law, but did not rule on if the reconciliation was sufficient enough to preclude the claim due to the lack of evidence presented relating to defendant’s good faith effort to reconcile, or lack thereof.

