Citation
471 N.W.2d 869,1991 Iowa Sup.

Brief Fact Summary
Ken and Fumi were married in Japan and Ken subsequently moved to Iowa.  Ken filed for divorce in Iowa, and Fumi contested the personal and subject matter jurisdiction of the Iowa district court.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Rather than minimum contacts, domicile continues to be the basis for a court’s jurisdiction to grant a dissolution of marriage decree.  However, under the divisible divorce doctrine, the court will not necessarily have jurisdiction to adjudicate other incidents of the marriage, such as alimony.

Facts
Ken and Fumi Kimura were married in Japan in 1965, and both are Japanese citizens.  Ken graduated from medical school in Japan, and is currently a pediatric surgeon in Iowa.  In 1986 he was invited to come to the United States on a temporary H-1 work visa.  The medical center where he worked filed an application on Ken’s behalf for permanent residency status, which he received in 1987.  In 1988 he filed a divorce mediation proceeding with the family court in Japan.  In July he withdrew because he could not attend the court’s reconciliation proceeding because of work.  In December he filed a petition for dissolution of marriage in Iowa, alleging that he had resided there for more than one year, that his residency was not just for the purpose of obtaining a dissolution, and that a breakdown of the marital relationship had occurred.  Because personal service was not possible on Fumi in Iowa, a copy of the petition was mailed to her in Japan and notice of the petition was publishe

Issue
Did Iowa’s assertion of jurisdiction over respondent, who had no contacts with Iowa, or her marriage based solely on petitioner’s alleged residence in Iowa violate the due process clauses of the United States and Iowa Constitutions?

Held
Iowa’s assertion of jurisdiction based upon the residency of respondent’s husband was constitutional.

Discussion
Special jurisdictional rules are applicable to divorce proceedings, with the traditional minimum contacts analysis being inapplicable.  Residency must be established for jurisdiction in divorce proceedings, and forum non conveniens may be argued if another jurisdiction is more convenient.

