Citation
188 Md. 403,52 A.2d 910,1947 Md.

Brief Fact Summary
Testimony revealed that appellant, a married man, had spent significant amounts of time away from his home with co-respondent, a woman in a separate marital relationship.  Appellant’s wife was granted a divorce based on appellant’s adultery.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
To prove adultery through circumstantial evidence, it must be established that there was both an opportunity and a disposition to commit the act.

Facts
Appellant, William Lickle, was married in 1917 to respondent, Margaret Lickle.  The parties had not cohabited for many years, although they resided in the same house.  In 1937 appellant met Gordon Boone and his wife Edith, the co-respondent.  While Gordon Boone was commissioned overseas in the navy, Appellant and Edith became increasingly intimate.  Appellant was a frequent visitor to each of Edith’s four homes, and one of her maids testified that appellant was at one of the homes most of the time.  Another maid testified that he stayed overnight several times a week at two of Edith’s later homes.  Twice during the summer of 1943 appellant and Edith vacationed in Maryland.  The first time appellant was accompanied by one of his sons, while Edith and one of her sons had rooms across the hall.  The second trip involved appellant and Edith traveling together unaccompanied, with appellant registering for both.  They occupied separate rooms but visited each other frequently, someti

Issue
Did the evidence support appellant’s wife’s charge of adultery?

Held
The conduct of appellant and Edith, both married individuals, is inconsistent with innocence.  The court’s ruling is upheld.

Discussion
The Court provides a clear explanation of the burden of proof required to prove adultery in divorce and the requirements to find adultery occurred from circumstantial evidence.  Based on the facts the Court found that sufficient circumstantial evidence was present to find that adultery had occurred.

