Citation
375 S.E.2d 333

Brief Fact Summary
Mrs. Reid was unhappy with various aspects of her marriage to Dr. Reid and his constant work schedule.  Mrs. Reid sought a divorce on the grounds of constructive desertion, Dr. Reid responded claiming divorce on desertion.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Proof of an actual breaking off of matrimonial cohabitation combined with intent to desert constitutes desertion as grounds for divorce.  However, reasons for leaving the marriage other than an intent to desert may justify discontinuance of the relationship without giving rise to grounds for divorce.

Facts
Judith Reid married Dr. Robert Reid in 1965.  Mrs. Reid worked in medical technology in a local hospital and Dr. Reid was in medical school.  In 1966 the first of four children were born to the couple.  In 1967 the couple moved to New York City where Dr. Reid completed internship and residency.  Following a stint by Dr. Reid in the Navy, the couple moved to Charlottesville, where Dr. Reid obtained a position at the University.  He became tenured, head of his division, and director of the nurse practitioner program.  He subsequently left the University to establish a medical corporation.  In the early years of their marriage Mrs. Reid was a homemaker.  In 1980 she began part-time employment at her husband’s corporation, and ultimately became its controller.  In 1985 Mrs. Reid and two other individuals formed a travel agency.  However, in April of 1984 Mrs. Reid moved out, and in June she sought a divorce on the ground of constructive desertion.  Dr. Reid responded seeking a div

Issue
Did the circumstances both parties attest to provide justification as a matter of law for Mrs. Reid leaving the marriage?

Held
By deserting the marriage without legal justification Mrs. Reid forfeited her right to spousal support.  Therefore, the commissioner erred by not granting Mr. Reid divorce on grounds of desertion.

Discussion
The Court sympathizes with Mrs. Reid’s marital problems, but a concise application of the law forces a determination that Mrs. Reid deserted the marriage and had no reason to do so other than the intent to desert.  Thus, she is at fault and barred from collecting spousal support.

