Citation
2005 U.S. App.

Brief Fact Summary
The plaintiff, Julie Atkinson (the “plaintiff”), sued the defendant, Robert Hall (the “defendant”), to collect child support.  The defendant contended the child was not his, but the plaintiff submitted a blood test that showed the defendant had a 98.27 percent chance of being the father.  The jury unanimously found for the defendant.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
If two conflicting presumptions exist, a court should apply the one that is the strongest after considering policy and logic, or disregard both if there is no determination that one prevails over the other.

Facts
The defendant dated the plaintiff off and on from December 1970 until October 1971.  They went to Connecticut together in September 1971 and engaged in sexual intercourse.  The defendant soon returned to Maine and did not see the plaintiff until she visited him in jail.  He testified that during the visit the plaintiff told him she was going to marry Gerald Marshall (”Mr. Marshall”), and she was pregnant with Mr. Marshall’s child.  The plaintiff testified that she was pregnant with the plaintiff’s child and told him so during the visit.  The child was born on July 20, 1972, and the name on his birth certificate was Jay Alan Marshall.  Mr. Marshall was listed as the father on the birth certificate, and a certificate of baptism also listed Mr. Marshall as the father.  The plaintiff and Mr. Marshall were divorced five to eight months after the child’s birth.  The divorce decree required Mr. Marshall to pay child support, of which he made one payment.  The size and weight of the c

Issue
Was the plaintiff prejudiced when the district court instructed the jury to decide the case by a preponderance of the evidence, instead of giving a paternity presumption instruction for the plaintiff?

Held
Justice Hornby issued the opinion of the Supreme Court of Maine and affirmed the judgment finding that the plaintiff was not entitled to a paternity presumption instruction over a legitimacy presumption, and she was not prejudiced.

Discussion
Weighing both logic and policy, the Supreme Court of Maine found that the paternity presumption was not stronger than the legitimacy presumption.  Further, the jury was allowed to consider all the evidence regarding the plaintiff’s relationship with both men, and about the child.

