Citation
22 Ill. 475 U.S. 157, 106 S. Ct. 988, 89 L. Ed. 2d 123 (1986)

Brief Fact Summary
The defendant and two others went to the victim’s apartment looking for drugs. An argument broke out and the defendant ended up inflicting a fatal stab wound to the victim. Defendant expressed to his attorney that he had to concoct a story the victim having a weapon in order to win on a theory of self-defense. Defendant’s attorney informed him that if he perjured himself on the stand, the attorney would have to inform the court of the deception. Defendant was found guilty of second degree murder. He petitioned for a writ of habeas corpus and the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit granted the writ.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
An attorney is precluded from taking steps or in any way assisting the client in presenting false evidence or otherwise violating the law and should admonish the client about his duty to inform the court if the defendant perjures himself on the stand.

Facts
Defendant, Whiteside and two others went to Calvin Love’s apartment looking for drugs. An argument broke out and Love allegedly told his girlfriend to get “his piece” and then he returned to bed. According to Whiteside, Love then started to reach under his pillow and moved toward him. In fear of his life, Whiteside inflicted a fatal wound by stabbing Love in the chest. Whiteside was charged with murder and he initially told his court-appointed attorney that he stabbed Love as the latter was pulling a gun from underneath his pillow. After further questioning by his attorney, Whiteside told him he had not actually seen a weapon. No guns were found on the premises and none of the individuals there at the time of the incident saw a gun. Defendant’s counsel informed him that the existence of a gun was not necessary to establish the claim of self-defense. Defendant, however, expressed to his attorney that he had to concoct a story about seeing the victim with a weapon in order to wi

Issue
Does an attorney’s admonition to his client that he will inform the court about what he sees as a client’s plan to commit perjury violate a defendant’s right to effective assistance of counsel under the Sixth Amendment?

Held
No. The judgment of the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals is reversed and habeas corpus denied.

Concurrence
Justice William J. Brennan concurring in the judgment. This Court has no constitutional authority to establish rules of ethical conduct for lawyers practicing in the state courts. The Court’s essay is pure discourse without the force of law.

Discussion
Attorneys who adopt the role of the judge or jury to determine the facts pose a danger of depriving their clients of the zealous and loyal advocacy required under the Sixth Amendment. This lawyer’s actions were a proper way to provide his client with effective representation without having to confront the more difficult questions of what a lawyer should do after his client has given testimony the lawyer does not beli

