Citation
356 U.S. 525, 78 S. Ct. 893, 2 L. Ed. 2d 953, 1958 U.S.

Brief Fact Summary
Byrd (Petitioner), a resident of North Carolina, filed a diversity suit in the District Court for the Western District of South Carolina for injuries allegedly caused by the negligence of Blue Ridge Rural Electric Cooperative, Inc.’s (Respondent), a South Carolina corporation.  Petitioner was a lineman in a construction crew of a contractor who had contracted to build power lines for the Respondent.  Petitioner was injured while connecting power lines during the course of his employment.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
There are varying degrees of the Guaranty Trust Co. “outcome-determinative test.”  The fact that the decision of which law, federal or state, to apply will should be outcome-determinative is not conclusive.  There may be other countervailing considerations.

Facts
The Respondent offered, as an affirmative defense, that the Plaintiff had the status of a statutory employee under the South Carolina Workmen’s Compensation Act (Act).  Therefore, he was barred from suing Respondent at law, so he had to settle for statutory compensation benefits as the sole remedy.  At trial, the jury returned a verdict for Petitioner.  However, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit reversed, and directed judgment for the Respondent.

Issue
Whether the “outcome-determinative test” as established by the court in Guaranty Trust Co. should apply to the decision of whether to try an issue before a judge or a jury?

Held
The likelihood of a different result is not so strong as to require the federal court practice of jury determination of disputed factual issues to yield to the state rule in the interest of uniformity of outcome.  As a result, the Supreme Court of the United States reversed the decision of the court of appeals and remanded for further proceedings consistent with its opinion.

Discussion
The decision of whether to try a case before a judge or before a jury is less outcome determinative than, as was the decision in Guaranty Trust Co., to completely bar a suit by an applicable statute of limitations.  The decision of whether to try a case before a judge or before a jury is so little outcome-determinative that strong countervailing considerations such a federal policy should compel the district court to refuse to follow the applicable state rule.  As a result, the court rejected the “outcome-determinative test” and created a “balance of interests test” in which the federal court weighs whether the state or federal judicial system has the greater interest in having its rule applied to the matter.

