Citation
410 Mass. 760, 575 N.E.2d 1086, 1991 Mass. 33 ERC (BNA) 1885.

Brief Fact Summary
A corporation owned contaminated land, and the government placed a lien on the property.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The government may place a lien on property which is contaminated to ensure a prompt and efficient clean up.

Facts
Acme Laundry Company, Inc. (Acme I) acquired a parcel of land and operated a laundry business. Acme I adopted a liquidation plan and conveyed twelve parcels of land to Acme Laundry Company (Acme II), which succeeded to the rights of Acme I. Prospective purchasers of the laundry site had environmental engineers examine it. And contamination was found. The Department of Environmental Quality Engineering sent a letter to Acme II stating that the company was liable for contamination and would be responsible for all costs associated with it. The Department warned that the liability was a debt and created a lien on all of Acme II’s property. Acme II stated that they would take necessary action. Acme III was then incorporated, and Acme II conveyed the contaminated property to Acme III. A lien was placed on the property owned by Acme III. Acme II and III filed an action requesting a declaration that the lien is invalid. They claim that the Department could not place a lien on their pr

Issue
Can a state place a lien on property, which is an environmental hazard?

Held
Yes.

Dissent
The imposition of a lien on all of the property impairs the company’s capacity to complete the cleanup they agreed to undertake. It is not to be expected that an informed owners of a contaminated site would agree to undertake a cleanup project at his expense when he will also be liable for monitoring costs incurred.

Discussion
Land use regulations are imposed by environmental protection laws. Environmental regulations can restrict the buying and selling of real estate because of the government’s ability to place on lien on property involved in environmental h

