Citation
29 Ch. 459 (1885).

Brief Fact Summary
Defendants sought funding for a property and Plaintiff advanced Defendants 1500 pounds. Defendants made several misstatements to Plaintiff. Plaintiff sued Defendant for deceit.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
In order to sustain an action for deceit, Plaintiff must first prove that there was a statement as to facts where was false; and secondly, that it was false to the knowledge of Defendants, or that they made it not caring whether it was true or false. Lastly, when you have proved that the statement was false, you must further show that the statement was wither the sole cause of Plaintiff’s act, or materially contributed to his so acting.

Facts
Plaintiff advanced 1500 pounds for debentures of a society of which Defendants were the directors and officers. To raise the funds, Defendants circulated a prospectus that announced that they had acquired a valuable property subject to a half yearly payment of 500 pounds in redemption of a mortgage of 21,500 pounds. They also stated that they would use to the money to complete alterations and additions to the buildings and purchase their own horses and vans and to further develop the arrangements for the direct supply of cheap fish. Those statements were impeached because: (1) they were framed to lead a person to believe that the debentures would be a charge on the property of the company; (2) it failed to mention a second mortgage on the property; (3) it failed to state that the entire 21,500 pound mortgage was due in full on April 5, 1884; and, (4) that the real object of the debentures was to pay off present company liabilities and that the company could not complete its pl

Issue
Are Defendants liable to Plaintiff for deceit?

Held
Yes. Judgment affirmed.

Discussion
This case sets out the prima facie elements for an action in deceit. First, Plaintiff must prove that Defendant made a statement, which was false. In this first requirement, puffing does not constitute a statement. Second, Plaintiff bears the burden to prove that Defendant made the statement knowing it was false, or with reckless disregard to its truth. This standard incorporates those false statements intentionally made and those false statements that are negligently made. Finally Plaintiff must show causation; that the false statement was either the sole cause or a contributing cause of Plaintiff’s act. This last requirement can usually be met with a showing of reliance. That in so acting, Plaintiff relied on Defendant’s false statement.

