Citation
22 Ill.505 U.S. 672, 112 S. Ct. 2711, 112 S. Ct. 2701, 120 L. Ed. 2d 541, 20 Med. L. Rptr. 1297 (1992)

Brief Fact Summary
The Petitioner, the International Society for Krishna Consciousness, Inc. (Petitioner), is a religious group who distributes literature and solicits funds in airports in the New York Metropolitan area. The Port Authority of New York restricts groups like the Petitioner to soliciting and distributing on the sidewalk areas of the airport. The Petitioner feels that this is restriction is an unconstitutional restrictions on their right to free speech.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Governmental regulation of speech on governmental property is valid if it is reasonable and the primary purpose of the property is not to promote free speech.

Facts
The Petitioner is a non-profit religious corporation whose members perform a ritual known as sankirtan. This ritual consists of going into public places, disseminating religions literature and soliciting funds to support the religion. The Respondent, Walter Lee (Respondent), is the police superintendent charged with enforcing all regulations within the airports in the New York metro area. The regulation at issue in this case prohibits the repetitive solicitation of money or distribution of literature within its terminals. As a result, the Petitioner brought suit seeking declaratory and injunctive relief. The District Court granted petitioner injunctive relief, while the Court of Appeals affirmed in part and reversed in part. The Court of Appeals concluded that the ban on solicitation was reasonable, while the ban on distribution of literature inside airport terminals was unreasonable.

Issue
Whether an airport terminal operated by a public authority is a public forum?

Held
The majority held that when the government acts as a proprietor, managing its internal operations, its actions are not subjected to the heightened review to which actions as a lawmaker are subject.

Dissent
The dissenters state that a public forum is any piece of public property that is suited for discourse in its physical character. Furthermore, the solicitation ban should be reversed because there is no evidence of fraud or coercive conduct.

Discussion
The majority believes that there can be reasonable restrictions made by the government to activities in certain public places like an airport. The concurrences and dissent would rather see an evidentiary hearing for each particular case rather than a blanket exception. This case also presents the different sides to the debate concerning the definition of a public forum. A public forum being defined by the majority of the Court as a property that has “a principle purpose the free exchange of ideas consistent with the notion that government, like other property owners, has power to preserve the property under its control for the use to which it is lawfully dedicated.” The location of the property has bearing on whether it is a public forum because separation from acknowledged public areas may serve to indicate that the separated property is a special enclave, subject to greater restrictions. There are also several important limitations. First, a government does not create a

