Citation
22 Ill.512 U.S. 753, 114 S. Ct. 2516, 129 L. Ed. 2d 593 (1994)

Brief Fact Summary
The Petitioners, Madsen and other abortion protesters (Petitioners) regularly protested the Respondents, the Women’s Health Center and other abortion clinics (Respondent), in Melbourne, Florida. The Respondents then sought and was granted, by a Florida trial court, an injunction on several grounds, restraining the Petitioner’s ability to protest, which was upheld by the Florida Supreme Court. The Petitioner’s appeal to the United States Supreme Court (Supreme Court) claiming that the injunction restricted their rights to free speech under the First Amendment of the United States Constitution (Constitution).

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Elements of an injunction limiting free speech will be upheld if they burden no more speech than necessary to eliminate the unlawful conduct targeted. But, if the provisions sweep more broadly than necessary to accomplish the permissible goals of the injunction the injunction will be invalidated.

Facts
The Petitioners protest abortion clinics run by Respondents. The Petitioners picketed and demonstrated where the public street gives access to the clinic. The Petitioners have been permanently enjoined by a Florida court from blocking or interfering with public access to the clinic and from physically abusing persons entering or leaving the clinic. Six months later, the Respondents sought to broaden the injunction, complaining that the Petitioners still impede potential patients. The trial court then issued a broader injunction, for which the Petitioners challenge as a violation of their First Amendment constitutional rights. The Amendment injunction prohibits the Petitioners from entering the premises of the Respondents, blocking or impeding access to the Respondents’ premises, from picketing and demonstrating or entering a portion of public right of way or private property within 36 feet of the property line of the Clinic, from causing excess noise from 7:30 am to noon Monda

Issue
Whether the State has a significant state interest enabling it to restrict the Petitioners’ First Amendment constitutional rights?<br />	Whether the 36 foot buffer zone around the clinic entrances and driveway are constitutional restrictions on the Petitioners’ First Amendment constitutional rights?<br />	Whether the 36 foot provision as applied to private property around the clinic is a constitutional restriction on the Petitioners’ First Amendment constitutional rights?<br />	Whether the noise prohibition provision of the injunction is a constitutional restriction on the Petitioners’ First Amendment constitutional rights?<br />	Whether the images observable prohibition is a constitutional restriction of the Petitioners’ First Amendment constitutional rights?<br />	Whether the 300-foot no approach zone around the clinic and residences is a permissible restriction of the Petitioners’ First Amendment constitutional rights?

Held
Yes. The State has a strong interest in protecting a woman’s freedom to seek lawful medical or counseling services in connection with her pregnancy. The State also has an interest in ensuring public safety, and public order, in promoting the free flow of traffic on its streets and sidewalks. The State also has a strong interest in protecting residential privacy. The combination of which is sufficient to justify an appropriately tailored injunction to protect them.<br />	Yes. The 36-foot buffer zone around the clinic entrances and driveway burdens no more speech than necessary to accomplish the governmental interest at stake.<br />	No. The 36-foot buffer zone on private property around the clinic burdens more speech than necessary to protect access to the clinic, as nothing in the record indicates that the Petitioners’ activities on the private property have obstructed access to the clinic.<br />	Yes. The limited noise restrictions limit no more speech than necessary to ensure the health and well-being of the patients at the clinic. The First Amendment of the Constitution does not demand that patients at a medical facility undertake Herculean efforts to escape the cacophony of political protests.<br />	No. The images observable provision in the injunction limits more speech than necessary to achieve the purpose of limiting threats to clinic patients or their families. It is much easier for the clinic to pull its curtains than for a patient to stop up her ears, and no more is required to avoid seeing placards through the windows of the clinic. Therefore this provision is an unconstitutional restriction because of the availability of this less restrictive means.<br />	No. The record before the Supreme Court does not contain sufficient justification for this broad ban on picketing, it appears that a limitation, on the time, duration of picketing, and number of pickets outside a smaller zone could have accomplished the desired result, while placing a lesser restriction on the Petitioners’ First Amendment constitutional rights.<br /><br /><span class='heading'>Dissent.</span><br />	Concludes that under the circumstances the prohibition against physically approaching in the 300-foot zone around the clinic withstands the Petitioners’ First Amendment constitutional challenge. This is because the Petitioners’ “counseling” of the clinic’s patients is a form of expression analogous to labor picketing. It is a mixture of content and communication. Just as the First Amendment of the Constitution protects the speaker’s right to offer “sidewalk counseling” to all passersby. That protection, however, does not encompass attempts to abuse an unreceptive or captive audience, at least under the circumstances in this case. The dissent also feels that the injunction generally should be no more burdensome than necessary to provide complete relief. Therefore, standards fashioned to determine the constitutionality of statutes should not be used to evaluate injunctions.<br />	The injunction in this case departs so far from the established jurisprudence of the Supreme Court that in any other context it would have been regarded as a candidate for summary reversal. But since this decision deals with abortion, no legal rule or doctrine is safe from ad hoc nullification by the Supreme Court when an occasion for its application arises in a case involving state regulation of abortion. The dissent believes that the 36 foot speech-free zone did not meet the burden for the test the Supreme Court set, as it burdens more speech than necessary. The dissent charges that speech-restricting injunctions are deserving of strict scrutiny by the Supreme Court and that the Supreme Court did not award it this level of review in this case and therefore dissents from all portions of the judgment upholding the injunction.<br />

Discussion
This case provides an item by item breakdown of elements of an injunction pertaining to First Amendment constitutional rights and undergoes a careful analysis of each of them, analyzing the state interest at stake and determining whether or not the injunction awarded is the least restrictive means of accomplishing the goal the state wishes to accomplish within their interest. This case, providing several different examples of this analysis provides a clear methodology by which injunction elements pertaining to free speech are analyzed and can be transferable to different fact patterns. The dissent does provide a key warning in its opinion that this opinion is potentially tainted by the abortion question, which could lead to a different result on a different issue. It is important to mention this key idea in the dissent, but until proven otherwise, the methodology in this case applies to all elements of an injunction pertaining to First Amendment constitutional rights in a

