Brief Fact Summary
During custody proceedings, father produced testimony that demonstrated mother participated in homosexual activity.  The court awarded sole custody of the children to father based on this activity.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A per se rule that a parent who engages in homosexual activity is unfit to be the custodian of his or her child is incompatible with the best interests of the child standard.  A nexus approach whereby the relevant issue is not the nature of the parent’s sexual activity but whether that activity adversely affects the child is more congruent with the best interests of the child.

Facts
Mother and father were married in 1985.  As a condition of marriage, father asked mother to submit to a psychological evaluation to test the parties’ compatibility for marriage.  During a meeting with the father’s psychologist, mother revealed that she was sexually attracted to both men and women and had engaged in sexual activity with women in the past.  Based on mother’s expressed commitment to a monogamous relationship, father married mother.  Three minor children were born to the marriage, and mother stayed home to care for them as well as father’s son from a previous marriage.  In 1994 mother filed a petition for dissolution of marriage requesting joint legal custody of the minor children and that she be designated the primary physical custodian of the children.  Father filed an answer requesting the court dissolve the marriage and award him sole custody with restricted visitation to mother.  Evidence was presented at trial that mother engaged in homosexual conduct and in

Issue
Were the court’s rulings based on an apparent per se rule that a parent who engages in homosexual behavior is unfit to be custodian of his or her child consistent with the best interests of the child inquiry?

Held
An irrefutable presumption, where a parent’s homosexual conduct is, alone, determinative, is inherently inconsistent with the best interests of the child standard.

Discussion
The court acknowledged that the per se rule had been upheld in previous cases, but felt that it was not compatible with the best interests of the child standard.

