Citation
140 Cal. App. 3d 473,189 Cal. Rptr. 479,1983 Cal. App.

Brief Fact Summary
Petitioner challenged the constitutionality of a local court rule that required a mediator to make a recommendation as to temporary custody when the parties were unable to reach an agreement but forbade the parties from cross-examining the mediator as to his reasons for the recommendation.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A rule forbidding cross-examination of a mediator regarding his reasons for his recommendations for temporary child custody was unconstitutional.

Facts
California civil code requires prehearing mediation of child custody and visitation disputes in marital dissolution proceedings, providing that if the parties fail to agree in the proceedings the mediator may render a recommendation to the court as to the custody or visitation of the children involved.  Respondent Superior Court had adopted a local court rule that requires the mediator to make a recommendation to the court if the parties fail to agree in the mediation proceedings, but prohibits cross-examination of the mediator by the parties.  Petitioner Thomas McLaughlin and real party in interest Linda McLaughlin were married in 1969.  They had three children, and upon divorce the wife requested joint legal custody as well as physical custody.  Husband applied for temporary custody with visitation to the wife.  At a hearing to show cause petitioner’s counsel recited his understanding that the pending issues of temporary custody and visitation were to be referred for mediati

Issue
Does the court’s local rule permitting a recommendation by the mediator but forbidding cross-examination of the mediator violate constitutional due process?

Held
Yes, the husband is entitled to a writ of mandate directing the court to not receive a recommendation from the mediator as to any contested issue unless the court has first made a protective order guaranteeing the parties the rights to have the mediator testify and to cross-examine him concerning the recommendation unless said rights have been waived.

Discussion
The Court found that a local rule requiring a mediator to make a recommendation as to temporary custody when the parties were unable to reach an agreement but forbidding the parties from cross-examining the mediator as to his reasons for the recommendation was unconstitutional.

