Citation
529 Pa. 198,602 A.2d 845,1992 Pa.

Brief Fact Summary
Father gained custody of his son partially based upon the son’s testimony that he preferred to live with his father.  The Superior Court reversed the decision and returned custody to mother.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
When the home of both the mother and the father are equally acceptable, the court should give weight to the custody preference of the child, so long as the preference is based on good reasons and the child is sufficiently mature and intelligent to express an opinion.

Facts
The parties married in 1975 and produced a son, Emmett.  The parties divorced in 1981, with the Wyoming curt awarding primary custody of Emmett to the mother, subject to the reasonable visitation of father.  In 1982, father instituted an action seeking partial custody of Emmett.  The court awarded general custody to the mother with the right of visitation in the father, limiting the father’s visitation to alternating weekends and holidays, one day every other week and two weeks during the summer.  Father sought modification 4 times over the next 6 years and mother sought modification once.  Each time the court significantly expanded father’s visitation rights.  From 1986 on Emmett repeatedly and steadfastly expressed his preference to live with his father.  In 1988 the court awarded general custody to the father.  On appeal, the Superior Court vacated the order and reinstated the previous order, determining that: 1) the record failed to present any circumstances warranting a c

Issue
Did the Superior Court err in overruling the custody order of the trial court?

Held
The Superior Court erred because the trial court correctly found that both households were equally suitable and therefore Emmett’s preference to live with his father tipped the scale in favor of granting the father custody.

Discussion
The case demonstrates that a child’s preference regarding custody will be considered so long as it is based on good reasons.  The child’s maturity and intelligence must be considered in this determination.

