Citation
105 Ohio App. 3d 176,663 N.E.2d 955,1995 Ohio App.

Brief Fact Summary
Appellee father was granted custody based upon factors such as appellant mother’s frequent moves, work, attendance at law school, and conception of a second child with a man to whom she was not married.  Mother appealed.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The best interests of the child standard requires an inquiry into the direct or probable effect of parental conduct on the physical, mental, emotional, and social development of the child, rather than a determination of which lifestyle choices made by a parent are correct in the judgment of the court.

Facts
Appellant Kimberly Rowe and appellee Donald Franklin were married in 1987, with the marriage producing a son.  In 1991 appellant left the marital residence with the child and filed a complaint for divorce.  In 1992 appellant moved to Kentucky for a short time without appellee’s knowledge.  She moved to be closer to her part-time job as pilot for the U.S. Army, and she also attended law school.  Appellee was an ironworker unemployed during that summer.  The trial court order required neither parent remove the child from the state without court order or parental agreement.  In 1993 appellant petitioned the court to modify the order to allow her to remove the child to Kentucky and establish his residence there.  She had applied to take law school classes there and had become pregnant by a man who she was seeing that was married by separated from his wife.  She enrolled her son in private school for the times she would attend class.  Father filed an emergency motion for contempt a

Issue
Did the court abuse its discretion in granting custody to the appellee?

Held
The trial court abused its discretion by its reliance on an erroneous standard to justify the designation of the residential parent.

Discussion
The Court found that the trial court judged the mother during the custody hearing rather than judging how the mother’s acts affect her child.  This is not compatible with the best interests of the child standard.

