Citation
530 U.S. 57,120 S. Ct. 2054,147 L. Ed. 2d 49,2000 U.S.

Brief Fact Summary
The paternal grandparents brought a petition requesting visitation of their granddaughters.  The mother agreed to some visitation, but did not agree to the extended visitation requested.  Mother appealed the court’s granting of visitation as unconstitutional.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The court’s presumption that it is normally in the best interest of children to spend time with the grandparent failed to provide any protection for Granville’s fundamental constitutional right to make decisions concerning the rearing of her own daughters.

Facts
Tommie Granville and Brad Troxel had two daughters during their relationship, but never married.  After the two separated, Brad lived with his parents (the daughters’ paternal grandparents) and regularly brought his daughters to their home for weekend visitation.  He committed suicide, but the Troxel grandparents continued to see the daughters on a regular basis.  Several months later Granville informed the Troxels that she wished to limit their visitation to one short visit per month.  The Troxels filed a petition for visitation, requesting two weekends overnight visitation per month and two weeks of visitation each summer.  Granville asked the court to order one day per month with no overnight stay.  The Superior Court ordered visitation of one weekend per month, one week during the summer, and four hours on each of the Troxels’ birthdays.  Granville appealed, during which time she married Kelly Wynn.  The Washington Court of Appeals remanded the case, with the Superior Cour

Issue
Does the Washington statute allowing any person to petition for visitation rights at any time infringe on the liberty interest of parents in the care, custody, and control of their children?

Held
The statute unconstitutionally infringes on the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.

Dissent
Neither the provision granting any person the right to petition for visitation nor the absence of a provision requiring a threshold finding of harm to the child provides a sufficient basis for holding that the statute is invalid in all its applications.  That the Constitution requires a showing of actual or potential harm finds no support in this Court’s precedent. At a minimum, besides the interests of the State and the parent, the interests of the child must be considered.  A parent’s rights with respect to her child are limited by the existence of an actual, developed relationship with a child, tied to some embodiment of family.  The State has an interest in protecting children against the arbitrary exercise of parental authority that is not in fact motivated by an interest in the welfare of the child.  Presumptions notwithstanding, there may be situations where a child has a stronger interest at stake than mere protection from serious harm caused y the termination of visi

Discussion
The Court found the statute unconstitutional because it was overbroad in that any person could petition for visitation at any time, and also the presumption that a fit parent would act in the best interests of the child was not recognized.

