Citation
22 Ill.512 U.S. 374, 114 S. Ct. 2309, 129 L. Ed. 2d 304, 38 ERC 1769 (1994)

Brief Fact Summary
The City of Tigard conditioned the approval of Dolan’s building permit on the dedication of a portion of her property for flood control and traffic improvements.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Land use regulations are constitutional so long as they do advance a legitimate state interest and do not deny an owner economically viable use of his land. When a city conditions the owner’s right to develop his property on some “give back” by the owner, there must be a “rough proportionality” between the burdens on the public and the development would bring about, and the benefits to the public from the give back.

Facts
Dolan owned a plumbing and electric supply store in the Central Business District. She wanted to double the size of the store and create more parking. Her plans were consistent with the city’s zoning scheme. The City granted the permit application subject to her dedicating the portion of her property lying within the 100-year floodplain for improvement of a storm drainage system along the creek and she would dedicate an additional 15-foot strip of land adjacent to the floodplain for a pedestrian/bicycle pathway. This would be 10% of her property. She could use that to meet the 15% open space requirement. The owner of a store wanted to expand. The city said that the owner could expand but the owner would need to deed to the public a 15-foot strip of land that would be used as a bike path. Dolan applied for variances because she argued that her proposed development would not conflict with the policies of the comprehensive plan. The City Planning Commission denied her request. Th

Issue
Do the permit conditions deprive Dolan of her property rights under the rubric of the Fifth Amendment?

Held
Yes. Judgment reversed.

Dissent
Justice Stevens, Blackmun, Gingsburg, and Souter dissenting:

Discussion
Nollan said that if the government imposes a condition on a permit, then there has to be an essential nexus. There has to be an actual tight fit between the means and the ends. The purpose has to be legitimate. Dolan further defined Nollan and said the burden or intensity of this condition has to be proportional to the problem created. Dolan argued that she did not contribute to the runoff problem or flooding issues as much as she was being restrained. Dolan had to designate some part of the property for a bike path but the amount of traffic reduced would not be proportional to the amount of land set aside and the imposition of this condition.

