Citation
22 Ill.381 U.S. 479, 85 S. Ct. 1678, 14 L. Ed. 2d 510 (1965)

Brief Fact Summary
A Connecticut statute prohibited the use of contraceptives both by married and unmarried persons. The statute also prohibited anyone from helping couples obtain contraceptives. Griswold provided information as to the means of preventing conception and was fined as an accessory under the statute.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The rights governed by the Due Process clause are those related to privacy. It is really the right people have to make decisions about highly personal matters. These rights derive indirectly from several Bill of Rights guarantees, which collectively create a “penumbra” or “zone” of privacy. Here, the person’s interest in using birth control is fundamental and the state cannot impair that interest without satisfying strict scrutiny. Strict scrutiny says that if a state or federal regulation is impairing a fundamental right, the court strictly scrutinizes the regulation. The objective pursued by the state must be compelling, and the means chosen must be necessary (nothing that would be less restrictive is available).

Facts
From November 1 to November 10, 1961, Griswold and Buxton operated a Planned Parenthood center in New Haven, Connecticut. They were arrested on November 10, 1961, for giving information, instruction and medical advice to married persons as to the means of preventing conception. This violated Connecticut statute Section: 53-32 which stated that any person who uses any drug or instrument for the purpose of preventing conception shall be fined not less than fifty dollars or imprisoned not less than sixty days nor more than one year or be both fined and imprisoned. Section: 54-196 stated that any person who assists, abets, counsels, causes, hires or commands another to commit any offense outlined in Section:53-32 may be prosecuted and punished as if he was the principal offender. The appellants were found guilty as accessories and fined $100 each.

Issue
Does the word “liberty” in the Due Process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment apply special constitutional protection for privacy in birth control decisions which would require special justification for state infringements on those interests?

Held
Yes. Reversed.

Dissent
Justice Black and Stewart dissenting.

Discussion
In the past chapters the Court determined that the word “liberty” in the Due Process clause gave special protection to the liberty of contract (labor law restrictions). More recently the Court has derived from the word liberty a special constitutional protection for privacy, personal autonomy and some family relationships requiring special justifications for state infringements of those interests. In this way general constitutional phrases become limitations on the power of legislatures.

