Citation
505 U.S. 1003, 112 S. Ct. 2886, 120 L. Ed. 2d 798, 34 ERC 1897 (1992)

Brief Fact Summary
A coastal zoning law rendered Lucas’s beachfront property virtually valueless. Lucas sued claiming that his property had been taken within the meaning of the Fifth Amendment, which required just compensation.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The Fifth Amendment prohibits governmental taking of private property for public use without just compensation. This prohibition applies to the states as well through the Fourteenth Amendment. In order to not constitute a taking, the land use regulation must first substantially advance a legitimate state interest, and second not deny the owner of all reasonably economically viable use of his land.

Facts
Lucas paid $975,000 for two residential lots in Isle de Palms in Charleston, South Carolina. He intended to build single-family homes on the property. The state passed the Beachfront Management Act, which had the direct effect of making Lucas’ property valueless because he could not build on the property. The State did not act until after the property had been zoned for individual lot development and most other parcels had been improved. This put the whole burden of the regulation on the remaining lots. Lucas sued claiming that his property had been taken within the meaning of the Fifth Amendment, which required just compensation. The trial court found that the property had been “taken” by operation of the Act and that the South Carolina Coastal Commission was ordered to pay “just compensation” in the amount of $1,232,387.50. The Supreme Court of South Carolina reversed the trial court and found that, because Petitioner did not challenge the facial validity of the Act as a rea

Issue
Did the dramatic effect on the economic value of Lucas’s lots amount to a taking of private property under the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments requiring the payment of “just compensation”?

Held
Yes. Judgment reversed.

Dissent
Justice Blackmun and Stevens dissenting:

Discussion
The determination whether a state law unlawfully infringes a landowner’s property in violation of the takings clause requires an examination of whether the restriction on private property forces some people alone to bear the public burdens which should be borne by the public as a whole.<br />	There is an explicit taking/eminent domain where there is an actual appropriation or destruction of a person’s property or a permanent physical invasion by the government or by the authorization of law.<br />	The right to exclude others from one’s property is one of the most essential sticks in the bundle of rights that are commonly characterized as property See: Loretto v. Manhattan CATV (1982), a case where cable installation was found to be an intrusion as a minor but permanent encroachment. The Court said this was enough to warrant damages. See also, Kaiser Atena v. US, a case where people made a waterway connected to a lagoon. Although the government may regulate the waterway, it does not follow that the pond is also subject to a public right of access. See also, Nolan v. CA Coastal Commission, where the government wanted an easement across the property to allow the public access to the beach.<br />	Even though the right against physical invasion is paramount, the State may show they have a compelling interest that outweighs the private interest. See: PruneYard Shopping Center v. Robins, a case where the Court said that the owners of a shopping center could not exclude the general public from exercising their free speech and petition rights, but they could restrict the expression by imposing reasonable time, place and manner restrictions. See also, State v. Shack, where the Court concluded that the title to real property cannot include dominion over the destiny of the migrant workers the owner permits to come upon the premises. Necessity justifies the government officials in entering to give them information because an owner cannot use property to injure others rights<br />	Implicit Taking/Regulatory Taking arises when the government has restricted the use of privately owned land for the public benefit to such an extent that compensation is required. A taking will occur when the owner is effectively denied all economic viable use of his land without the state advancing a legitimate state interest. The question in this case was how to know when the value of the land has been simply diminished or eliminated.<br />	If the idea of “property” is defined broadly as it was in Penn Central v. NYC, then it is harder to prove the regulation has eliminated all economic uses of the land. The bundle of sticks analysis comes in and the Court can find other economic uses of the land that could produce income, which are not uses the owner might have thought to use it for such as selling air rights of a building if not allowed to develop up. It is harder under such analysis for the owner to win. The dissent in this case said that this was a narrow law, which made one owner, or a few owners bear the burden of a public interest.<br />	If the idea of “property” is defined narrowly as only encompassing the owner’s specific investment backed expectations then it is easier to show a taking as it was in Lucas. Lucas wanted to build a single-family house and could not. The majority did not tell him to sell his property to his neighbors as a buffer or that the non-economic benefits still made the property valuable. The dissent said this was a general law applicable to everyone.<br />	The State will defend the regulation against a taking attack three ways. First if the facts allow, they would say they are trying to abate activities that are common law nuisances (Lucas). The regulations would do no more than duplicate the result obtainable by private parties under the state law of private nuisance. Second, the State validly exercised their police power to regulate for the health, safety or welfare purposes. This will require a fairly tight fit between the means chosen and the objective the State is pursing. Third, the use intended was already prohibited by the owner’s title (Lucas).<br />	If the state loses then the state must pay the property owner just compensation for the taking. That includes the fair market value, including any reasonable expectations that a buyer may have had about possible future uses. An owner is not entitled to additional value that is subjective and peculiar to the owner (Lucas). The owner could also obtain an injunction to invalidate the ordinance. The State could terminate the regulation and pay the owner for damages that occurred while the regulation was in effect.

