Citation
22 Ill.504 U.S. 905, 112 S. Ct. 1931, 118 L. Ed. 2d 538 (1992)

Brief Fact Summary
A California statute established that a child born to a married woman living with her husband at the time of birth is presumed to be the child of the marriage.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
An unwed father’s interest in establishing his paternity rights to his natural child must be “fundamental” and “traditionally protected by . . . society.”

Facts
Under California law, a child born to a married woman living with her husband is presumed to be a child of the marriage. The presumption of legitimacy may be rebutted by showing: (1) that the child of a wife cohabitating with her husband is impotent or sterile or (2) that blood tests are used to prove the natural father within two years after the child is born. A father wishing to establish paternity rights to his child challenged the California law. The California Court of Appeals upheld the constitutionality of the statute. The California Supreme Court denied discretionary review.

Issue
Can a state statute determine whether an unwed father has a constitutional right to have a relationship with his biological child.

Held
Justice Antonin Scalia (J. Scalia). Yes. A state statute may determine whether an unwed father has a constitutional right to have a relationship with his biological child. “It is a question of legislative policy and not constitutional law whether California will allow the presumed parenthood of a couple to retain a child conceived within and born into their marriage to be rebutted.” In order for the natural father to successfully establish paternity or have a liberty interest in establishing paternity, the interest must be “fundamental” and “an interest traditionally protected by our society” and that develops within a “unitary family.” The judgment of the California Court of Appeals is affirmed.

Dissent
The dissenting opinions are as follows:

Discussion
This case seems to hold the Supreme Court’s recognized historical traditions, of the unitary family, as a means for determining whether a father’s right to establish paternity to his natural child squarely fits into these traditions. If the father’s interest in establishing paternity is inconsistent with this historical understanding of family, then the father will be denied this right.

