Citation
22 Ill.431 U.S. 494, 97 S. Ct. 1932, 52 L. Ed. 2d 531 (1977)

Brief Fact Summary
A zoning ordinance limited occupancy within a dwelling unit to only a narrowly defined family unit.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Related individuals have a fundamental right to live with one another.

Facts
A Cleveland, Ohio housing ordinance limited occupancy of a dwelling unit to members of a single family. The ordinance defines “family” as including only a few categories of related individuals. The Appellant, Inez Moore (Appellant), challenged the constitutionality of the ordinance because her family failed to meet the legal definition of family under the Cleveland ordinance. The Appellant lived with her two grandsons who where only first cousins. Because her grandsons were not brothers, the Appellant was convicted for violating the ordinance and was sentenced to five days in jail with a $25 fine. The Ohio Court of Appeals affirmed the judgment. The Ohio Supreme Court denied review of the judgment.

Issue
Whether a housing ordinance limiting occupancy, within a dwelling unit, to a narrowly defined single-family unit is constitutional.

Held
Justice Lewis Powell (J. Powell). No. The United States Constitution (Constitution) prevents the Cleveland ordinance from precluding blood relatives from living together. The Cleveland ordinance is a violation of the Appellant’s fundamental right to live with her relatives. The state argues that the statute’s purpose is to prevent overcrowding, minimize traffic and parking congestion and avoid undue financial burdens on the city’s school system. The statue, therefore, selects certain categories of relatives who may live together and declares that others may not live together. The Supreme Court of the United States (Supreme Court) has not found the state’s goals to be served by the ordinance. The judgment is reversed.

Dissent
The dissenting opinions area as follows:

Discussion
This case was distinguished from the Court’s ruling in Belle Terre v. Borass, 416 U.S. 1 (1974), where an ordinance prohibiting unrelated people from living together was upheld. This case, however, holds that related people have a fundamental right to live together.

