Citation
22 Ill.510 U.S. 1309, 114 S. Ct. 909, 127 L. Ed. 2d 352 (1994)

Brief Fact Summary
Abortion clinics impose informed consent and notice requirements on women seeking to have an abortion.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Laws placing significant obstacles on a woman’s right to an abortion are unconstitutional.

Facts
Five abortion clinics and physicians providing abortion services challenged each of five provisions of the Pennsylvania Abortion Control Act (the Act) on its face. The Act required that a woman seeking an abortion give her informed consent prior to the abortion procedure and specifies that she be provided with certain information at least twenty-four hours before the abortion is performed. Under the Act, minors were required to provide informed consent of a parent. Also, the Act requires that a married woman seeking an abortion sign a statement indicating that she has notified her husband of her intended abortion. The District Court held all the provisions unconstitutional. The Court of Appeals upheld all the provisions except for the husband notification requirement.

Issue
Whether placing significant restrictions, such as consent and notification requirements, on a woman seeking to have an abortion is a violation of the woman’s constitutional rights.

Held
Justices Sandra Day O’Connor (J. O’Connor), Anthony Kennedy (J. Kennedy) and David Souter (J. Souter). Yes. “A finding of an undue burden is a shorthand for conclusion that a state regulation has the purpose or effect of placing a substantial obstacle in the path of a woman seeking an abortion of a nonviable fetus. A statute with this purpose is invalid because the means chosen by the State to further the interest in potential life must be calculated to inform the woman’s free choice, not hinder it.” The judgment is affirmed.

Dissent
The dissenting opinions are as follows:

Discussion
This case reaffirms the holding of Roe v. Wade as being three parts. “First is a recognition of the right of the woman to choose to have an abortion before viability and to obtain it without undue interference from the State. Before viability, the State’s interests are not strong enough to support a prohibition of abortion or the imposition of a substantial obstacle to the woman’s effective right to elect the procedure. Second is a confirmation of the State’s power to restrict abortions after fetal viability, if the law contains exceptions for pregnancies which endanger a woman’s life or health. And third is the principle that the State has legitimate interests from the outset of the pregnancy in protecting the health of the woman and the life of the fetus that may become a child.”

