Citation
132 Md. App. 312,752 A.2d 653, 2000 Md. App.

Brief Fact Summary
Defendant was convicted of numerous crimes resulting from an assault on a victim. Defendant contends that he lacked the requisite mental state for conspiracy to commit murder in the second degree and that because he was acquitted of conspiracy to commit murder in the first degree, he cannot be convicted of this offense.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
It is factually possible for two or more individuals to conspire without premeditation and deliberation. Conspiracies do not require formal expressions of agreement or advance planning.

Facts
Defendant was charged with numerous offenses in conjunction with an assault and shooting of Mr. Arias. Mr. Arias was shot in the stairwell of his apartment building by who was later identified as Defendant and another. Defendant was found guilty of some offenses and not guilty of others. The Defendant appealed arguing that conspiracy to commit second degree murder is not a crime. Defendant was acquitted of conspiracy to commit first degree murder and argues that this acquittal eliminates the second degree murder conspiracy charge.

Issue
Whether Defendant had the requisite statement of mind for the crime of conspiracy to commit second degree murder.

Held
Affirmed. A jury may opt to convict a Defendant of a lesser included offense of second degree murder.

Dissent
The dissent stated that deliberation and premeditation are essential elements of an agreement to commit an intentional killing. The dissent would reverse the conviction for conspiracy to commit second degree murder.

Discussion
The Court focused its discussion on whether for the mental state element of conspiracy to commit murder required premeditation and deliberation. Although the Court referenced decisions in which other jurisdictions found that prior planning and agreement were necessary, the court ruled that with a shout of “lets go” two friends after drinking could decide to commit an assault and that this would sustain a conspiracy to commit an assault.

