Citation
528 F.2d 999,1976 U.S. App.

Brief Fact Summary
Defendants were charged with conspiracy that cumulated with a shoot out with the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and local police. Defendant argued that there was no agreement to participate in the shoot out and appeal the convictions for conspiracy.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
It is not necessary to prove an express agreement between the alleged conspirators to violate the law. The common plan can be inferred from a development and collocation of circumstances.

Facts
Defendants were part of a group called the Republic of New Africa. The group was formed as an independent foreign nation composed of ‘citizens’ descended from Africans who at one time were slaves in the United States. The FBI raided their compound. During the raid, gunshots were fired, an officer was killed and two wounded. Defendants were found guilty of conspiracy to commit assault, using firearms and possessing unregistered firearms. On appeal, Defendants contend that the evidence did not show any agreement to commit the offenses found.

Issue
Whether there existed an agreement between Defendants that constituted a conspiracy to commit the crimes alleged.

Held
Affirmed, except with respect to one Defendant, which there is insufficient evidence to show she had any knowledge of the conspiracy.

Discussion
The Court focused on what circumstances could arise that would indicate an agreement and satisfy the common plan element of the crime of conspiracy. The Court stressed that it takes very little to establish an agreement once the prosecution has proved a common plan between the alleged conspirators. Next, the Court devoted analysis to each Defendant and identified the specific actions that lead the court to decide that they were part of the conspiracy. One Defendant was successful. The successful Defendant was not present until two days prior to the shoot out, did not participate in the shoot out and was found to only provide food to the participants after the shoot out.

