Brief Fact Summary
Gearing and other stockholders owning 50% of the stock of the Radium Chemical Company, (Appellants) brought suit to set aside the election of a director.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A vacancy in the board of directors may be filled by a majority vote even though less than a quorum is present.

Facts
According to the bylaws of Radium Chemical Company, Inc., the board shall consist of four directors, a majority of whom constitute a quorum. In 1961 the board consisted of Meacham, Kelly, Sr. and Kelly Jr., Margaret E. Lee having resigned as the fourth director. Meacham did not attend the board meeting held on March 6, 1961 for the sole purpose of preventing a quorum from assembling. At this meeting, the two attending directors, Kelly, Sr. and Kelly, Jr. elected Julian Hemphill, the son-in-law of Kelly Sr. as the fourth director. Stockholders including Meacham’s mother, Gearing, brought suit seeking to set aside the election of Hemphill.

Issue
Whether justice requires the Court to order a new election.

Held
No. Appellants have failed to show that justice requires a new election in that they may not now complain of an irregularity that they themselves have caused.

Dissent
Two members of the board are insufficient to constitute a quorum according to the bylaws of the company. Therefore, the election of Hemphill is void and must be set aside. This is a contest for control and the Court should not assist either side. If the parties are deadlocked and choose to remain so, they have other remedies and the court should not help one side by disregarding a bylaw that follows the statute, particularly when it results in giving the Kellys complete control.

Discussion
Meacham did not attend the meeting with the purpose of preventing a quorum from assembling and with the intent to paralyze the board. The relief sought by appellants would be of no avail to them for Meacham would then be required as evidence of her good faith to attend. Such a futile act will not be ordered.

