Citation
307 N.Y. 1, 119 N.E.2d 563 (1954)

Brief Fact Summary
David Radom, (Petitioner), brought this proceeding requesting Radom & Neidorff, Inc. be dissolved. Special Term granted his request and Anna Neidorff, (Respondent) appealed. Petitioner appeals the Appellate Division judgment in favor of Respondent dismissing the action.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
An order for dissolution is granted only when the competing interests are so discordant as to prevent efficient management and the object of is corporate existence cannot be attained. The primary inquiry is as to necessity for dissolution, that is, whether judicially imposed death will be beneficial to the stockholders or members and not injurious to the public.

Facts
Radom & Neidorff, Inc. is a domestic corporation with two stockholders each holding eighty shares. The two original stockholders were Henry Neidorff and Petitioner. When Henry Neidorff died, he left his shares to Respondent, his wife, who also happens to be Petitioner’s sister. Petitioner brought this proceeding requesting the corporation be dissolved. His complaint alleges that Respondent has refused to cooperate with him as president and has refused to sign his salary checks. Further unresolved disagreements have resulted in an inability of the stockholders to elect any directors.

Issue
Whether dissolution will be beneficial to the stockholders and not injurious to the public.

Held
No. Dissolution will not be beneficial to the stockholders and will be injurious to the public.

Dissent
Here the stockholders are deadlocked with regard to the election of a board of directors. If the court has discretion to grant the order for dissolution then there is no ground for withholding it here, for there is no alternative corrective remedy. Petitioner could continue to remain as president and manager without compensation or he could quit, which would not bode well for the corporation. It is difficult to believe that the legislature could have intended to put someone in this position to such a choice. Further, the deadlock is between the stockholders, not the directors. When the stockholders are deadlocked, Section 103 calls for dissolution, not arbitration. Section 103 finds no relevance in the profits and losses of the business but only in whether or not the stockholders are deadlocked.

Discussion
The corporation has been and continues to be successful.  Despite the feuding, there is no deadlock as to corporate policies. Respondent has offered to have the third director named by the American Arbitration Association, any Bar Association or any recognized and respected public body.  Dissolution is not necessary for the corporation or for either stockholder. The failure of Petitioner to receive his salary did not frustrate the corporate business and is remediable by means other than dissolution. This is not a case where dissolution is necessary.

