Citation
243 La. 829, 147 So. 2d 646, 1962 La.

Brief Fact Summary
The husband of the Plaintiff, Ms. Perkins (Plaintiff), was a passenger in a car when a train at a railway crossing struck the car. The Plaintiff’s husband was killed.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The defendant’s negligence must be a substantial factor in the cause of the harm for liability to attach.

Facts
The Plaintiff’s husband was killed in a collision between the car he was a passenger in and a freight train operated by the Defendant, New Orleans Railroad Co. At the intersection of the road and rail crossing where the accident occurred, a large warehouse obstructed the view of both the car’s driver and the train’s engineer and brakeman. The train’s engineer and brakeman were aware of the obstruction and while approaching the intersection rang the train’s bell and whistle and put its headlights on. The intersection also had warning signals to warn drivers of approaching trains. These signals were operating at the time of the accident. Of the three railway employees in the forward engine of the train only two, the brakeman and a fireman saw the car emerge from the intersection. The third, the engineer did not see the car due to the obstructed view, but applied the emergency brakes when his companions alerted him to the presence of the car. At the time of the accident the train

Issue
Whether the negligence of the Defendant was a substantial factor in causing the accident.

Held
The train’s speed was not a substantial factor in the cause of the accident.

Discussion
By traveling twelve miles over the self-imposed speed limit, the engineer was negligent. The engineer testified that even at a rate of 25 mph, the train could not have avoided the car. Based on this testimony, the court finds that the speed of the train was not a substantial factor in the crash. Because the accident would have occurred even if the train had been traveling within the speed limit, the negligence of the train’s operator is not a substantial factor in the collision.

