Citation
93 Mass. 548, 11 Allen 548 (1866)

Brief Fact Summary
Plaintiff was a customer at Defendant’s barber shop and found a pocket-book on the counter which he left with Defendant to attempt to discover the rightful owner. When the rightful owner was not found, Plaintiff demanded return of the pocket-book, which Defendant refused to give back.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
When a customer leaves a pocket-book on the counter of a shop the item is not subject to the historical rules regarding lost property.

Facts
Plaintiff was a customer at Defendant’s barber shop and found a pocket-book on the counter which he left with Defendant so that Defendant could attempt to discover the rightful owner. When the rightful owner was not found, Plaintiff demanded the pocket-book which Defendant refused to give back. Plaintiff left the pocket-book with Defendant for Defendant to find the rightful owner and to advertise so that the owner might be found. Plaintiff made three demands for return of the pocket-book from Defendant, who denied that he possessed the pocket-book until the last. The parties agreed that the pocket-book was placed on the counter by a customer of Defendant’s barber shop and was accidentally left there, that Plaintiff fist saw the pocket-book and picked it up, and that the rightful owner was not found. Plaintiff sued for the return of the money found in the pocket-book. The lower court ruled for Defendant and Plaintiff appealed.

Issue
Was this property lost in such a manner as to allow the finder of the item to hold a valid claim of ownership against all except the rightful owner?

Held
No. Exceptions overruled. (Judgment for Defendant affirmed).

Discussion
In this type of situation, the rightful owner would naturally seek his pocket-book in the shop where he had been, but he would not even be aware of a person in Plaintiff’s position, let alone be able to make a valid claim to retain the pocketbook from that person. Courts seek to achieve equitable results in cases such as these.

