Citation
95 ER 1124, Volume 95

Brief Fact Summary
Plaintiff lost his eye when Defendant threw a lighted squib at another person, who threw it at another out of fear, who threw it at Plaintiff out of fear. Plaintiff sued Defendant for trespass and assault.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
If an act causes direct and immediate danger and injury ensues, Defendant is responsible in trespass for all consequences of the act. The action need not be pled in case.

Facts
Sheperd, Defendant, threw a lighted squib (firecracker) into a marketplace. It landed on a salesman’s stand. One Willis picked it up and tossed it towards Ryal’s stand to prevent harm to his goods. Ryal picked up the squib and tossed it. The squib exploded in front of Scott’s (Plaintiff’s) face. Plaintiff lost an eye. Subsequently, Plaintiff sued Defendant for trespass and assault. The jury returned a verdict for Plaintiff of 100 pounds with Judge Nares presiding, subject to the opinion of the court en banc.

Issue
Was the action of Defendant throwing the squib in the marketplace sufficient to sustain an action in trespass?

Held
Yes. Postea (judgment entered for) Plaintiff.

Dissent
Judge Blackstone: An action in trespass does not lie against Defendant. Defendant can only be held responsible in trespass for the immediate act that ensued from him tossing the squib, i.e., it landing on the cart. Once Willis and Ryal picked up the squib, Defendant was no longer responsible in trespass. Ryal would be a proper defendant in trespass because it was his act that caused the injury and he could have tossed the squib elsewhere. Both Willis and Ryal intervened and in their own judgment decided to toss the squib around the marketplace. This stopped any trespass between Plaintiff and Defendant. Finally, an action in case may lie against Defendant, because the injury was only consequential.

Discussion
The majority’s opinion illustrates that an action in trespass can lie even if the injuries were consequences of the actual “act” if the “act” is considered continuous. In this situation, the act was throwing the squib into the marketplace and such act continued until the squib exploded. This should be compared with Blackstone’s strict interpretation finding the “act” stopped when the squib landed on the first cart. The case illustrates that the distinction between actions in trespass and actions in case can hinge on subtle facts.

