Citation
431 Mass. 150,725 N.E.2d 1051,2000 Mass.

Brief Fact Summary
Husband and wife bore twins as a result of in vitro fertilization, and frozen preembryos remained.  On divorce, wife attempted to enforce a consent form allowing her to retain custody of the preembryos upon separation of the couple.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
As a matter of public policy, the court will not enforce an agreement that forces an individual to become a parent if such individual later reconsiders his or her decision.

Facts
Husband A.Z. and wife B.Z. were married in 1977.  The couple experienced fertility problems, and turned to in vitro fertilization (IVF) sing wife’s ova and husband’s sperm.  The wife conceived and gave birth to twin daughters in 1992.  More preembryos were formed than necessary, and two vials of preembryos were frozen for possible future implantation.  Prior to the separation of the couple, the wife had one of the remaining vials of preembryos thawed and implanted.  No pregnancy resulted.  Ultimately they divorced, and one vial containing 4 frozen embryos remained in storage.  During the procedure, the clinic required egg and sperm donors to sign consent forms for relevant procedures.  Each consent form explained the general nature of the procedure and outlined the freezing process.  The forms also require the donor to decide the disposition of the frozen preembryos on certain listed contingencies, including separation.  On the initial form filled out by the wife, the decision

Issue
May the law compel an individual to become a parent over his or her contemporaneous objection?

Held
Prior agreements to enter into familial relationships should not be enforced against individuals who subsequently reconsider their decisions.

Discussion
The Court initially points out that the agreement is not binding because it is questionable that it expressed the couple’s intent on divorce and does not provide terms that would cover birth after the divorce.  The Court then holds that it would not enforce the agreement if it were unambiguous as a matter of public policy.

