Citation
416 Mass. 205,619 N.E.2d 315,1993 Mass.

Brief Fact Summary
Two unmarried women living together in a committed relationship conceived a child where the mother was artificially inseminated by the cousin of the other woman.  The couple petitioned for adoption by the non-mother, who was actively raising the child along with the mother as her own.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The statutory law grants jurisdiction for the court to enter judgment on a joint petition for adoption brought by two unmarried cohabitants in the petitioners’ circumstances, and the statutory law does not require the mother to terminate her legal relationship to her daughter due to the proceeding.

Facts
Two unmarried women (Susan and Helen) filed a joint petition to adopt Tammy, a minor, who is Susan’s biological daughter.  The two lived together in a permanent, committed relationship for more than ten years.  They jointly purchased a house together, and both were successful physicians.  The two planned to conceive a child biologically related to both of them, and Susan conceived the child through artificial insemination by Helen’s cousin.  The women attended childbirth classes together, and Helen was present for the birth.  Tammy’s birth certificate reflects the cousin as her biological father, but she was given a hyphenated surname using Susan and Helen’s last names.  Since birth, Tammy has lived with, been raised and supported by Helen and Susan.  Tammy has strong emotional and psychological bonds with both Helen and Susan.  The cousin does not intend to be involved with Tammy, signed an adoption surrender, and supports the joint adoption by both women.  The law does not p

Issue
Did the court have jurisdiction under statutory law to enter judgment on a joint petition for adoption brought by two unmarried cohabitants in the petitioners’ circumstances?

Held
The statutory law does not bar the adoption by two unmarried cohabitants in the above described situation.

Discussion
The Court found that there was no statutory obstacle to adoption by the same sex couple, and that any apparent need for the mother’s legal relationship to be terminated was not legislatively intended.  Further, the Court pointed out the beneficial legal protections that arise from such an adoption.

