Citation
1 Cal. 4th 816,823 P.2d 1216;4 Cal. Rptr. 2d 615,1992 Cal.

Brief Fact Summary
Petitioner, an unwed father, petitioned the court to prevent the adoption of his biological son.  The child’s mother consented to the adoption.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
If an unwed father promptly comes forward and demonstrates a full commitment to his parental responsibilities his federal constitutional right to due process prohibits the termination of his parental relationship absent a showing of unfitness as a parent.

Facts
Kari S. gave birth to Kelsey, with the child’s undisputed natural father being petitioner Rickie M.  The couple was not married, and petitioner was aware that Kari planned to place their child for adoption.  Two days after the birth, petitioner filed an action to establish his parental relationship and to obtain custody.  The court awarded temporary custody to petitioner, and the prospective adoptive parents filed an adoption petition alleging that only the mother’s consent to the adoption was required because there was no statutorily presumed father.  The court modified its order, awarding the birth mother temporary custody and ordering her to live with the child in a shelter for unwed mothers.  The court prohibited visitation by either the prospective parents or petitioner.  The prospective adopters petitioned to terminate petitioner’s parental rights.  The court allowed petitioner to have supervised visitation and allowed the prospective adopters to have unsupervised visita

Issue
Is a natural father’s federal constitutional rights violated if his child’s mother is allowed to unilaterally preclude him from obtaining the same legal right as a presumed father to withhold his consent to his child’s adoption by third parties?

Held
The relevant statute is unconstitutional.  If an unwed father promptly comes forward and demonstrates a full commitment to his parental responsibilities his federal constitutional right to due process prohibits the termination of his parental relationship absent a showing of unfitness as a parent.

Discussion
The Court found that the statute prohibiting an unwed father to prevent an adoption violated petitioner’s equal protection and due process rights, and was not substantially related to any legitimate state interest.

