Citation
1999 MT 117,294 Mont. 417,982 P.2d 446,1999 Mont.

Brief Fact Summary
Birth and adoptive parents contracted to have continued visitation between the adopted child and the birth mother.  The adoptive parents refused to abide by the agreement, and the birth mother sought specific performance.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Visitation agreements between birth and adoptive parents are enforceable so long as continued visitation is in the best interests of the child.

Facts
Groves signed a document terminating her rights to L.C. when L.C. was 3, relinquishing custody to Lutheran Social Services (LSS) and consenting to adoption.  Groves and the Clarks signed a written visitation agreement providing that Groves would have unrestricted visitation so long as she gave the Clarks 2 days notice; that Groves would have unrestricted telephone contact; and that she would have the right to take L.C. out of school in the event that she had to go to Butte for some emergency.  The agreement was drafted by LSS and neither party consulted an attorney before signing.  In February 1994 the court terminated Groves’ parental rights and awarded custody of L.C. to LSS.  In September 1994 the Clarks legally adopted L.C.  Groves and the Clarks abided by the agreement until June 5, 1995, when Groves notified the Clarks that she wanted to take L.C. to Butte for the weekend and the Clarks refused.  They told Groves that she was welcome to visit L.C. in their home, but coul

Issue
Did the court err in its determination that the visitation agreement was enforceable because continued visitation was in the best interests of the child?

Held
The court’s finding that continued visitation was in the best interest of L.C. was not clearly erroneous.

Discussion
The Court found that enforcement of visitation agreements between birth and adoptive parents are enforceable so long as they are in the best interests of the child, that the wishes of the adoptive parents are not paramount in such determinations, and that the courts may modify such agreements if the best interests of the child so require.

