Citation
442 Mich. 648, 502 N.W.2d 649 (1993)

Brief Fact Summary
Mother surrendered custody of her child to petitioners, as did the person mother alleged as father.  Mother later recanted and admitted another father was the biological father, and this father petitioned for paternity and custody.  The Iowa court granted father custody, but a Michigan court granted petitioners request to modify the custody ruling.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
If a custody determination in a state is consistent with the provisions of the UCJA and the PKPA, every State shall enforce its terms and not modify the decision.

Facts
On February 8, 1991 Cara Clausen gave birth to a baby girl.  On February 10, she signed a release of custody, relinquishing her parental rights to the child, and named Scott Seefeld as the father.  On February 14, he executed a release of custody.  On February 25, petitioners, Michigan residents, petitioned the Iowa court to adopt the child.  At hearing, the parental rights of Clausen and Seefeld were terminated, and petitioners were granted custody during the pendency of the proceeding.  Petitioners returned to Michigan with the child.  Nine days after filing of the adoption proceeding Clausen filed a motion to revoke her release of custody stating that she had lied when she named Seefeld as the father and that the actual father was Daniel Schmidt.  Schmidt filed an affidavit of paternity seeking to intervene in the adoption proceeding initiated by petitioners.  The Iowa court found that Schmidt was the biological father and that petitioners failed to establish either that he

Issue
Did the Michigan court have jurisdiction to rule on the petitioner’s claims and did petitioners have standing?

Held
Michigan did not have jurisdiction and petitioners did not have standing based upon the previous Iowa ruling and the UCJA and PKPA.

Dissent
The PKPA was enacted to protect the child in the interest of greater stability of home environment and of secure family relationships for the child.  The home state is the state which can best decide the case in the interest of the child, defined as where the child lived with his parents, a parent, or a person acting as a parent for at least six consecutive months.  Michigan is the child’s home state because she lived in Michigan with petitioners, persons acting as a parent, for at least six consecutive months.  There is more substantial evidence concerning the child’s present or future care, protection, training and personal relationships in Michigan than in Iowa.  The subject matter jurisdiction in adoption should be where the adoptive parents reside and the child is physically present.  A decree rendered by a state other than the home state is not a determination made consistent with the provisions of the PKPA.  A decree rendered without consideration of the child’s best i

Discussion
The majority found that Michigan was without jurisdiction to modify the Iowa ruling based upon the UCCJA and the PKPA.  The minority found that Iowa never had jurisdiction, and that the failure of Iowa to address the best interests of the child rendered the decision unenforceable.

