Citation
74 Misc. 2d 99,345 N.Y.S.2d 430,1973 N.Y. Misc.

Brief Fact Summary
A child was born by artificial insemination during a marriage.  Wife and husband separated and the wife’s new husband attempted to adopt the child, claiming that the previous husband’s consent was unnecessary because he was not the parent of the child.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A child born of consensual AID during a valid marriage is a legitimate child entitled to the rights and privileges of a naturally conceived child of the same marriage.  The husband in such a relationship is therefore the parent, and his consent is required to the adoption of such child be another.

Facts
Two types of artificial insemination exist: Homologous insemination, whereby the wife is artificially impregnated with the semen of her husband (AIH); and heterologous insemination, the artificial insemination of the wife by the semen of a third-party donor (AID).  AID procedures have increased due to the unavailability of adoptive children.  In the present case, a child was born of consensual AID during the marriage.  The husband was listed as the father on the birth certificate.  The couple later separated, followed by a divorce.  The separation agreement and divorce decree declare the child to be the daughter and child of the couple.  The wife was granted support and the husband visitation rights.  Husband faithfully visited and performed all support conditions.  The wife later remarried and her husband petitioned to adopt the child.  The first husband refused to consent, and petitioner suggested that the first husband’s consent was not required because he is not the parent

Issue
Is the husband’s consent required as the parent of a child born of consensual AID?

Held
A child born of consensual AID during a valid marriage is a legitimate child, therefore the father of such child is the parent whose consent is required to the adoption of such child.

Discussion
The Court based its determination that AID children born during a valid marriage are legitimate and the husband is the legal parent of such a child based on policy considerations.

