Citation
479 N.W.2d 408,1991 Minn. App.

Brief Fact Summary
Grandparents of D.L. were granted adoption over her foster parents based on an Act granting preferences in the adoptive placement of a child of minority racial or ethnic heritage.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The racial preferences established by the Act are unconstitutional, and placement should be based on the child’s best interests, considering also the common law preference for placement with near relatives.

Facts
D.L., born July 12, 1989, was the third child born during the marriage of Debra L. and Jonathan L.  D.L. was placed in the care of appellants, her foster parents, a few days after birth.  D.L. Debra, and respondent grandparents are African-American, the foster parents and father are not.  Debra’s two other daughters live with the grandparents, who have legal custody.  Respondents first learned of D.L.’s existence in August of 1989 when Debra called and told them.  Debra refused to give any further information.  Debra visited respondents several months later and they urged her to get the baby and live with them.  In February 1990, respondents learned that Debra was in jail and contacted her.  She assured them that D.L. was with good people and she would get her back.  In June 1990 Debra told respondents that if she could not get out of jail she was going to lose D.L.  Respondent grandmother traveled to Minneapolis to look for D.L., and was able to locate her through the placeme

Issue
Does the Act impermissibly classify adoptive children based upon their race, thereby violating the 14th Amendment’s Equal Protection Clause?

Held
The racial classification in the Act fails under the Equal Protection Clause because it is not necessary to the accomplishment of the legislative purpose.

Discussion
The Court found that the Act was unconstitutional, but that the trial court’s separate analysis that it was in the child’s best interests to live with her grandparents was supported by the evidence.

