Citation
109 N.J. 396,537 A.2d 1227,1988 N.J.77 A.L.R.4th 1

Brief Fact Summary
The Sterns entered into a surrogacy contract with the Whiteheads whereby Mrs. Whitehead would bear the child of Mr. Stern through artificial insemination and relinquish custody of the child to the Sterns upon birth.  Once the child was born Mrs. Whitehead found herself unable to part with the child, and sought to retain custody.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The surrogacy contract is unenforceable due to violation of both statutory law and public policy.  Custody must be determined based upon the best interests of the child.

Facts
In 1985 William Stern and Mary Beth Whitehead entered into a surrogacy contract stating that Stern’s wife, Elizabeth, was infertile, that they wanted a child, and Mrs. Whitehead was willing to provide that child as mother with Mr. Stern as father.  Through artificial insemination using Mr. Stern’s sperm, Mrs. Whitehead would become pregnant.  Mrs. Whitehead would deliver the born child to the Sterns and terminate her maternal rights so that Mrs. Stern could thereafter adopt the child.  Mrs. Whitehead’s husband, Richard, was also a party to the contract; Mrs. Stern was not.  Mr. Whitehead promised to do all acts necessary to rebut the presumption of paternity.  The contract gave Mrs. Stern sole custody in the event of Mr. Stern’s death.  Mr. Stern agreed to pay Mrs. Whitehead $10,000 after the child’s birth, on its delivery to him.  He agreed to pay $7,500 to the Infertility Center of New York (ICNY), and ICNY arranged for the surrogacy contract.  The history of the parties sug

Issue
Is the surrogacy contract enforceable, and if not, who should gain custody of Baby M?

Held
The surrogacy contract is unenforceable, but the Sterns should retain custody based upon the best interests of the child.

Issues
To assert that Mr. Stern’s right of procreation gives him the right to the custody of Baby M would be to assert that the constitutional right of procreation includes a constitutionally protected contractual right to destroy someone else’s right of procreation.  Mr. Stern also contends he was denied equal protection of the laws by the State’s statute granting full parental rights to a husband in relation to the child produced, with his consent, by the union of his wife with a sperm donor.  The claim is really that of Mrs. Stern, she is precisely in the same position as the husband in the statute.  The State has more than a sufficient basis to distinguish between the two situations so as to justify automatically divesting the sperm donor of his parental rights without automatically divesting a surrogate mother.  Mrs. Whitehead claims the right to the companionship of her child, which is a constitutionally protected fundamental interest.  Having held the contrac

Discussion
The Court found that the surrogacy contract was unenforceable because it violated state statutes and public policy.  Nonetheless, based solely on the best interests of the child custody was granted to the Sterns, with visitation rights to Mrs. Whitehead.

