Citation
25 N.Y.2d 560, 255 N.E.2d 765, 307 N.Y.S.2d 647, 1970 N.Y.

Brief Fact Summary
The Plaintiff, Nader (Plaintiff), alleged that the Defendant, General Motors Corp. (Defendant), harassed and intimidated him to prevent the Plaintiff from releasing his book about the Defendant, “Unsafe at any Speed.” At issue are the Plaintiff’s claims for invasion of privacy and intentional infliction of emotional distress.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Privacy is invaded only if the information sought is of a confidential nature and defendant’s conduct was unreasonably intrusive. There can be no invasion of privacy where the information sought is open to public view or has been voluntarily revealed to others.

Facts
The Plaintiff, an author and lecturer on automobile safety, has, for some years, been an articulate and severe critic of the Defendant’s products from the standpoint of safety and design. The Plaintiff claimed that Defendant, having learned of the imminent publication of the Plaintiff’s books “Unsafe at any Speed,” decided to conduct a campaign of intimidation against him in order to suppress the Plaintiff’s criticism of and prevent his disclosure of information about its products. The Plaintiff alleged that the Defendant’s agents: (1) questioned the Plaintiff’s acquaintances about the Plaintiff’s social, racial, religious and sexual views; (2) kept the Plaintiff under surveillance in public places for an unreasonable amount of time; (3) cause him to be accosted by girls to trap him into illicit relationships; (4) made threatening, harassing and obnoxious telephone calls; (5) tapped his telephone and eavesdropped on private conversations by using mechanical and electrical equi

Issue
Did the Plaintiff state a legally sufficient claim against the Defendant for invasion of privacy and intentional infliction of emotional distress?

Held
Yes. Judgment affirmed.

Discussion
The wiretapping and eavesdropping claims have been expressly recognized as tortuous intrusion. Additionally, if the surveillance in public is so overzealous, it may be actionable. However, the Plaintiff’s other claims are not actionable as invasions of privacy because the information was available to the public or easily attainable.

