Citation
311 U.S. 711 61 S. Ct. 393 85 L. Ed. 462 1940 U.S.

Brief Fact Summary
The Defendant, F-R Publishing Corp. (Defendant), wrote an article about the Plaintiff, William James Sidis (Plaintiff) who was once a public figure. The article was of public interest, however, it intruded upon the Plaintiff’s private life. The Plaintiff sued the Defendant for intrusion on his right to privacy.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Certain public figures must sacrifice their privacy and expose at least part of their lives to public scrutiny as the price of the power they attain.

Facts
The Plaintiff was the unwilling subject of a brief biographical sketch and cartoon printed in The New Yorker weekly magazine, which was published by the Defendant. The Plaintiff was a famous child prodigy. His name and prowess were well known to newspaper readers of the period. When he was sixteen, he graduated from Harvard College, amid considerable public attention. Since then, his name has appeared in the press only sporadically and he has sought to live as unobtrusively as possible. The article on the Plaintiff described his early accomplishments in mathematics and the widespread attention he received, then recounts his general breakdown and the revulsion which the Plaintiff thereafter felt for his former life of fame and study. It is not contended that any of the matter printed is untrue. Nor is the manner of the author unfriendly. The work possesses great reader interest, for it is both amusing and instructive. But it may be fairly described as a ruthless exposure of a o

Issue
Is an invasion of privacy actionable if the Plaintiff was a public figure and the statements printed were of interest to the public?

Held
No. Judgment affirmed.

Discussion
In this case, the Plaintiff was a very prominent public figure. Despite his effort to remain out of the public eye, the article in The New Yorker was written about him. However, in this case, the newsworthiness of the article is a defense to the Plaintiff’s claim of invasion of privacy.

