Citation
989 F.2d 1512, 1993 U.S. App

Brief Fact Summary
Defendant ran a television ad, which depicted Plaintiff for the purpose of selling Defendant’s VCR. Plaintiff sued Defendant for appropriation.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Television and other media create marketable celebrity identity value. The law protects the celebrity’s sole right to exploit this value whether the celebrity has achieved her fame out of rear ability, dumb luck, or a combination thereof.

Facts
Vanna White (Plaintiff) is the hostess of “Wheel of Fortune.” Plaintiff markets her identity to various advertisers. The dispute in this case arose out of a series of advertisements prepared for Samsung (Defendant). The advertisement, which prompted the dispute, was for Samsung videocassette recorders. The ad depicted a robot, which was consciously presented to resemble Plaintiff next to a game board that is instantly recognizable as The Wheel of Fortune. Defendant referred to the ad as the “Vanna White” ad. Plaintiff neither consented to the ads nor was paid. Plaintiff sued Defendant for: (1) California Civil Code section 3344, (2) the California common law right of publicity; and (3) the Lanham Act. The district court granted summary judgment against Plaintiff on each of her claims. Plaintiff appealed.

Issue
Is the appropriation of a person’s identity without consent an invasion of the right to privacy?

Held
Yes. Judgment reversed.

Dissent
(J. Kozinski) Overprotecting intellectual property is as harmful as under protecting it. Creativity is impossible without a rich public domain. Nothing today, likely nothing since we tamed fire, grows by accretion, each new creator building on the works of those who came before. Overprotection stifles the very creative forces it’s supposed to nurture.

Discussion
In this case, the Court abandoned the strict common law rules of appropriation. The viewer of the ad could clearly see that it was an attempt to convey Plaintiff on the set of Wheel of Fortune. Defendant hoped to profit from Plaintiff’s fame without paying her for it. Because Plaintiff did not consent to such appropriation, Defendant is liable.

