Citation
433 U.S. 562, 97 S. Ct. 2849, 53 L. Ed. 2d 965, 1977 U.S.

Brief Fact Summary
Defendant aired Plaintiff’s entire fifteen-second stunt on the news. Plaintiff sued Defendant for appropriation.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
False light is clearly a tort that protects reputation with the same overtones of mental distress as in defamation. In contrast, the right of publicity protects a proprietary interest of an individual in his act in part to encourage such entertainment.

Facts
Zacchini (Plaintiff) performed the stunt of a human cannonball where he was shot from a cannon into a net 200 feet away. Plaintiff performed this stunt at the county fair. Scripps-Howard Broadcasting (Defendant) filmed and aired Plaintiff’s fifteen-second stunt on the 11 o’clock news with favorable commentary. Plaintiff brought an action for appropriation, alleging that the act was invented by his father and performed only by his family, and Defendant showed and commercialized the film of his stunt without his consent. Defendant moved for summary judgment, which was granted. Plaintiff appealed. The Ohio Court of Appeals reversed, but the Ohio Supreme Court reversed its decision. The Supreme Court granted certiorari.

Issue
Do the First and Fourteenth Amendments privilege Defendant to broadcast Plaintiff’s entire stunt without compensation?

Held
No. Judgment reversed.

Dissent
(J. Powell) The Court’s holding that the station’s ordinary news report may give rise to substantial liability has disturbing implications, for the decision could lead to a degree of media self-censorship. I would hold that the First Amendment protects the station from a “right of publicity” or “appropriation” suit, absent a strong showing by Plaintiff that the news broadcast was a subterfuge or cover for private or commercial exploitation.

Discussion
In this case, the Court is not preventing Defendant from discussing Plaintiff’s stunt. That would have a chilling effect on the First and Fourteenth Amendments. Rather, the Court is preventing Defendant from airing the entire stunt, because it would give viewers less incentive to go down to the fair to see it for themselves. By airing Plaintiff’s entire stunt, Defendant attracted viewers that would have otherwise gone to see Plaintiff.

