Brief Fact Summary
Yugoslavian government officials or Serbians, who were accused of participating in a joint criminal enterprise to modify the ethnic balance in Kosovo, instigating, aiding and abetting various war crimes and crimes against humanity, as set out in Articles 7(1) and 7(3) of the Statute of the Tribunal of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, to further the goals of the criminal enterprise were Milutinovic (D), Sainovic (D), Ojdanic (D), Pavkovic (D), Lazarevic (D) and Lukic (D).

Synopsis of Rule of Law
It is only where there irrefutable evidence of participation in crimes against humanity and other crimes that government officials accused of being involved in joint criminal enterprise and instigating and aiding and abetting war crimes and crimes against humanity will be convicted.

Facts
A group of government officials by the names Milutinovic(D), Sainovic (D), Ojdanic (D), Pavkovic (D), Lazarevic (D) and Lukic (D) were accused of being involved in participating in a joint criminal enterprise to modify the ethnic balance in Kosovo and Instigating and aiding and abetting various war crimes and crimes against humanity as set out in Articles 7 (1) and 7 (3) of the Statute of the Tribunal of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, to further the goals of that criminal enterprise. The defendants were accused of; deportation, a crime against humanity (count 1); forcible transfer as “other inhumane acts” a crime against humanity (count 2); murder, a crime against humanity and violation of the laws or customs of war (count 3 and 4); and persecution, a crime against humanity (count 5).

Issue
Is it only where there is irrefutable evidence of participation in crimes against humanity and other crimes that government officials accused of being involved in joint criminal enterprise and instigating and aiding and abetting war crimes and crimes against humanity will be convicted?

Held
Yes. It is only where there irrefutable evidence of participation in crimes against humanity and other crimes that government officials accused of being involved in joint criminal enterprise and instigating and aiding and abetting war crimes and crimes against humanity will be convicted. Some of the allegedly proved crimes committed by the VJ and MUP forces included a broad campaign by the forces Kosovo Albanian civilians and the departure of at least 700,000 Kosovo Albanians from Kosovo. On the other hand, there were a number of allegations that were not proved on the facts because some requisite legal elements could not be met.

Discussion
Typically, war crimes and crimes against humanity are caused by  collective entities having State support. Hence, there must be a legal  theory which links the leaders to the acts that they themselves have not  committed in order for the International criminal tribunal to place the  responsibility on such leaders. A remarkable and highly controversial  conspiracy theory which revolved around the concept of “criminal  organization” was previously used by the International Military Tribunal  (IMT) at Nuremberg, following World War II. A similar innovative and  controversial conspiracy theory was also used by the International  Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (I.C.T.Y.) and this concept  revolved around the concept of “joint criminal enterprise” which used  state resources, was well organized and had the backing of the state.

