Brief Fact Summary
Crimes against humanity, conspiracy to commit war crimes and “judicial murder” were crimes the Judges (D) who were part of the Nazi regime were charged with, on the premise that they had destroyed law and justice in Germany and then utilized the emptied forms of legal process for persecution, enslavement and extermination on a large scale.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
(1) The Control Council, as an international body temporarily governing Germany is the source in which the military tribunal draws its power and jurisdiction to punish violations of international law.

Facts
A series of trial took place at Nuremberg after the end of the Second World War and some other locations in Germany under the Control Council Law No. 10 (C.C. Law 10). The Control Council consist of U.S. (P), U.S.S.R (P), France (P) and England (P) representatives respectively and it also governed occupied Germany. Trials were held before U.S. judges in U.S. occupied zones. In order to try what was called the “Justice Case” where the Defendants (D) were judges in the Nazi regime, the U.S. Military Government for Germany created the Military Tribunal III in 1947.

Issue
(1) Is the Control Council the source of the military tribunal power and jurisdiction to punish violations of international law?

Held
Holding and decision:  (1) Yes. The Control Council, as an international body  temporarily governing Germany is the source in which the military  tribunal draws its power and jurisdiction to punish violations of  international law. A state with a functioning government have always  been recognized take decision to punish war crimes of perpetrators that  come within the state’s jurisdiction, but at the state’s discretion, but  this is not the case in this situation because there was no functioning  German government. This implies that the punishment of violations of  international law in Germany is not dependent on the enactment of rules  of substantive criminal law that are applicable only in Germany. But the  military tribunal has the power to punish the violations of the common  international law because Germany is under the control of the Control  Council which is an international body that has assumed and exercised  the power to establish judicial machinery for the punishment of such  violations.  If the state had a functioning national government that  could exercise its sovereignty, such an international body would not be  able to exercise such power without the consent of the state.

Discussion
Ex post facto prosecutions (nullm crimen sine lege; nulla poena sine lege) are prohibited by a basic precept of criminal law. Most of the crimes against humanity, such as genocide and mass killing, have already been determined as crimes under every legal system. This therefore implies that it would be just under the ex post facto principles to prosecute and punish perpetrators of these crimes, as these crimes have merely been “internationalized” by the IMT Charter.

