Citation
547 Pa. 224, 690 A.2d 169,1997 Pa. 351, 69 A.L.R.5th 693.

Brief Fact Summary
Skipworth (Plaintiff) was hospitalized for lead poisoning on three separate occasions. Testing of the residence where she lived revealed the presence of lead based paint at various locations throughout the home. Plaintiff filed an action against several manufacturers of lead pigment and their successors, as well as a trade association (Defendants).

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Market share liability is not proper in lead paint poisoning cases

Facts
Plaintiff was born in 1988. Between 1990 and 1991 she was hospitalized for lead poisoning on three separate occasions. Testing of the residence where she lived revealed the presence of lead based paint at various locations throughout the home. Plaintiff filed an action against several manufacturers of lead pigment and their successors, as well as a trade association (Defendants). Plaintiff alleged physical and neuropsychological injuries as a result of lead poisoning from the lead paint in her home. Plaintiff could not identify the manufacturer of the lead pigment, which Plaintiff ingested, and admitted that they could not identify when such pigment was made, sold, or applied to her home. Plaintiff identified and joined substantially all of the manufacturers of lead pigment used in residential house paint from 1870 until production ceased in 1977. Plaintiff invoked theories of collective liability, market share liability, alternative liability, conspiracy, and concert of actio

Issue
Is market share liability proper in lead paint poisoning cases?

Held
No. Judgment affirmed.

Discussion
Market share liability is appropriate on a select few fact patterns. This lead paint case is not like the DES case. The relative time period that Plaintiff asserts in the lead paint case is far more extensive than the time period in the DES case. In addition, numerous lead paint manufacturers went into and went out of business during the one year time period, alleged by this case.

