Citation
140 F.3d 381, 1998 U.S. App. 5366.

Brief Fact Summary
Ms. Zuchowicz (Plaintiff) took an overdose of the drug, Danocrine because of the erroneous directions of a prescription. Plaintiff brought suit against the United States (Defendant) under the Federal Tort Claims Act.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
If (a) a negligent act was deemed wrong because the act increase the chances that a particular type of accident would occur; and (b) a mishap of that very sort did happen, this is enough to support a finding by a tier of fact that the negligent behavior caused the harm.

Facts
Plaintiff filed a prescription for the drug, Danocrine. The prescription erroneously instructed Plaintiff to take 1600-milligrams of Danocrine per day. This was twice the maximum recommended dosage. Plaintiff took the 1600-milligram dose each day for a month and experienced abnormal weight gain, bloating, hot flashes, night sweats, a racing heart, chest pains, dizziness, headaches, acne, and fatigue. She was told not to take the drug anymore. She was diagnosed with primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH). She was expected to live two and a half more years. She was on the waiting list for a heart lung transplant when she became pregnant. Because she was pregnant, she was ineligible for a heart lung transplant. She gave birth to her son and died a month later. Plaintiff claims that she developed PPH because of the overdose of Danocrine and brought suit against Defendant under the Federal Tort Claims Act.

Issue
Did Plaintiff present sufficient evidence that the overdose of Danocrine caused her illness?

Held
Yes. Judgment affirmed.

Discussion
It is not enough to say that the Danocrine was the cause of Plaintiff’s PPH. If it can be proven that a standard dosage of Danocrine would have caused Plaintiff’s PPH, then it was not the overdose of Danocrine that caused Plaintiff’s PPH. Plaintiff must show that it was the overdose itself. Because this is difficult to prove, the following test was used: If (a) a negligent act was deemed wrong because the act increase the chances that a particular type of accident would occur; and (b) a mishap of that very sort did happen, this is enough to support a finding by a tier of fact that the negligent behavior caused the harm. Plaintiff satisfied her burden and the burden thus shifts to Defendant.

