Brief Fact Summary
Following the genocide of Bosnia Muslims, a suit was brought against Serbia and Montenegro (D) by Bosnia and Herzegovina (P).

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The obligation under the Genocide Convention binds the contracting parties to the Convention not to commit, through their organs or persons or groups whose conduct is attributable to them, genocide and the other acts enumerated in Article II.

Facts
A suit was brought against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) (D) under the Genocide Convention by Bosnia and Herzegovina (P). The plaintiffs alleged that Serbia (D) contravened the Convention by committing genocide against Bosnia’s (P) Muslim population. The International Court of Justice in this first part of the case threw more light on the provisions of the Genocide Convention, including the undertaking to “prevent and punish” genocide in Article I, the definition of genocide in Article II, and the phase “responsibility of a State for genocide” in Article IX. (See Chapter 8, pages 54-55 for additional facts in this case).

Issue
Are the obligation under the Genocide Convention binding on the contracting parties and do they prevent the parties from committing, through their organs or persons or groups whose conducts are attributable to them, genocide and other acts enumerated in Article II?

Held
Yes. The obligation under the Genocide Convention binds the contracting parties to the Convention not to commit, through their organs or persons or group whose conduct is attributable to them, genocide and other acts enumerated in Article II.

Discussion
Serbia’s (D) violations of its obligation stems not only from the Genocide Convention, but also from two protective measures issued by the I.C.J. in April and September 1993, under which the former Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was ordered explicitly to prevent the crimes of genocide and to make sure that such crimes were not committed by military or paramilitary formations operating under its control or with its support. Serbia (D) did not make any effort to prevent the July 1995 Srebrenica massacre despite the order, although according to the I.C.J, it should have “been aware of the serious danger that acts of genocide would be committed”.

