Brief Fact Summary
A claim to settle a dispute involving sovereignty over certain islands, sovereign rights over certain shoals and delimitation of a maritime boundary was filed by Qatar (P) in the International Court of Justice against Bahrain (D). The Court’s jurisdiction was however disputed by Bahrain (D).

Synopsis of Rule of Law
An international agreement creating rights and obligations can be constituted by the signatories to the minutes of meetings and letters exchanged.

Facts
A dispute concerning sovereignty over certain islands and shoals, including the delimitation of a maritime boundary were issues upon which Qatar (P) and Bahrain (D) sought to resolve for 20 years. During this period of time, letters were exchanged and acknowledged by both parties heads of state. A Tripartite Committee “for the purpose of approaching the International Court of Justice…..” was formed by representatives of Qatar (P), Bahrain (D) and Saudi Arabia. Though the committee met several time, it failed to produce an agreement on the specific terms for submitting the dispute to the Court. Eventually, the meetings culminated in “Minutes”, which reaffirmed the process and stipulated that the parties “may” submit the dispute to the I.C.J. after giving the Saudi King six months to resolve the dispute. The Court’s jurisdiction was disputed by Bahrain (D) when Qatar (P) filed a claim in the I.C.J.

Issue
Yes. An international agreement creating rights and obligations can be constituted by the signatories to the minutes of meetings and letters exchanged. Though Bahrain (D) argued that the Minutes were only a record of negotiation and could not serve as a basis for the I.C.J.’s jurisdiction, both parties agreed that the letters constituted an international agreement with binding force.

Held
Yes. An international agreement creating rights and obligations can be constituted by the signatories to the minutes of meetings and letters exchanged. Though Bahrain (D) argued that the Minutes were only a record of negotiation and could not serve as a basis for the I.C.J.’s jurisdiction, both parties agreed that the letters constituted an international agreement with binding force.

Discussion
There is no doubt that language plays a vital role in influencing a court’s decision as to whether an agreement has been entered into and in this particular case, the language was the main focus of the I.C.J and it was the contents of the Minutes that persuaded the I.C.J. to reject the Bahrain foreign minister’s (D) claim that he did not intend to enter into an agreement. Where this is compared to general U.S. contract law, where a claim by one of the parties that no contract existed because there was no meeting of the minds might be the ground upon which a U.S. court would consider whether a contract did exist with more care and thought than the I.C.J. gave the foreign minister of Bahrain’s (D) claims.

