Citation
668 S.W.2d 286 (Tenn. 1984)

Brief Fact Summary
Appellee (Plaintiff) parked his car in a single entrance/ single exit parking garage taking a ticket and leaving his car locked. When he returned his car was gone.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A bailment for hire was created in this case and when there was non-delivery the Appellee (Plaintiff) was entitled to the presumption of negligence provided by statute.

Facts
The Appellant (Defendant) owned and operated a large downtown hotel along with a parking garage which was open to the public and hotel guests alike. The public could park its cars there and pay an amount upon leaving based on the amount of time the car was parked. In this case Appellee (Plaintiff) parked his brand new 1981 car in the parking garage which had one entrance and one exit. The entrance had a ticket machine which provided a ticket to be held by the driver of the car and stated that charges were made for the parking space only, that Appellant (Defendant) assumed no responsibility for loss through fire, theft, collision or otherwise to the car or its contents. The ticket also instructed the driver to lock his vehicle. The tickets were only used to determine the amount of money owed based upon the time that the vehicle was parked in the garage. The exit was a booth manned by an attendant. When Appellee (Plaintiff) returned to the garage, he found his car was missing. A

Issue
Does the act of parking one’s car in a parking garage create a bailment?

Held
Yes. Judgment affirmed.

Dissent
The dissent would hold that a bailment is created only when the owner of a parking garage has knowingly and voluntarily assumed custody and control of a motor vehicle. The mere act of taking a ticket upon exit is not sufficient to “return” a bailment, because the attendant was not required to particularly identify the object of the bailment, but only to compute the amount of money owed for the time on the ticket.

Discussion
Consideration of the type of relationship created in this transaction is crucial. It is useful to consider the elements of bailment, as well as elements of contract. These types of cases have been decided in a variety of

