Citation
22 Ill.549 U.S. 1069, 127 S. Ct. 704, 166 L. Ed. 2d 545 (2006)

Brief Fact Summary
The Defendant, Joseph Toscano (Defendant), was convicted of conspiring to obtain money by false pretenses. The Defendant argued that he acted under duress, but the trial court judge ruled the threatened harm was not sufficiently imminent. The appellate division affirmed the conviction.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The defense of duress applies to crimes other than murder if an individual participated in conduct because he was coerced to do so by the use of force or threat of force against him or another person whereby a person of reasonable firmness in his situation would have been unable to resist.

Facts
In 1972, eleven defendants were indicted for defrauding insurance companies by staging accidents in public places in order to obtain payments in injury settlement cases. The Defendant, a chiropractor, allegedly conspired to defraud Kemper Insurance Company. The majority of the defendants pled guilty to the crimes, including William Leonardo, the organizer of the conspiracy. The state attempted to show that the Defendant agreed to fill out the false medical report because he owed a gambling debt to Richard Leonardo (William’s brother). The Defendant claims he agreed to William Leonardo’s demands because he was fearful for his safety and the safety of his family. The Defendant testified that he refused several times when William Leonardo asked him to fill out the paperwork. After numerous phone calls to the Defendant, William Leonardo made veiled threats about knowing where he lived and that he should not leave his wife alone. The Defendant thought about calling the police, but

Issue
Does the defense of duress apply to crimes other than murder?

Held
Yes. The Defendant’s conviction is reversed and remanded for a new trial. Judge Pashman delivered the opinion of the court. The common law defense of duress was recognized only when the alleged coercion involved a use or threat of immediate harm. Thus, neither threats of minor injury nor threats of property destruction were thought to be coercive enough to overcome the will of a person of ordinary courage. Where future threats of harm are involved, courts have generally thought that an individual has a duty to seek assistance from law enforcement. However, under some situations, the commission of a minor criminal offense should be excused even if the coercive agent does not use or threaten force likely to result in death or serious bodily injury. It is possible that law enforcement might no be able to prevent a threat of future harm form eventually being carried out. The drafters of the Model Penal Code and the New Jersey Penal Code focused on whether the standard imposed upon

Discussion
Under the Model Penal Code provisions, it is up to the jury to decide whether a person of reasonable firmness in this situation would have failed to seek assistance from law enforcement, or in the alternative, been unable to resist the coercion.

