Citation
22 Ill.643 S.W.2d 902 (Tenn. Crim. App. 1982)

Brief Fact Summary
In January 1979, a police officer’s body was found in a park restroom with an unusual note on his back. The note was addressed to an FBI agent and contained an indecipherable string of words and phrases. Once the FBI agent was contacted, the police were led to the defendant. Defendant was charged with murder and sought to use the insanity defense at trial.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
In order to overcome evidence of insanity, the state must demonstrate through expert or lay testimony, or through the showing of acts or statements of the defendant at or near the time of the commission of the crime, that the defendant’s statements or actions were consistent with sanity and inconsistent with insanity.

Facts
Defendant, Green was charged with the murder of a police officer. The officer’s body was found lying in a pool of blood in a park restroom. On the officer’s back was a note wrapped in plastic. The note was addressed to an FBI agent named Ray Hanrahan and contained an indecipherable string of words and phrases. Hanrahan told police that Green came to his office and told him that some people in New York were sending messages to his brain and that a doctor in New York had invented a machine that could detect these matters. Hanrahan thought Green had mental problems and he suggested to him at the time to go and seek medical help. Green did in fact have mental problems stemming back to his childhood. In school he was known to pick fights with other children for no reason, and at age twelve he attacked his mother with a knife. Green was somewhat of a loner during his teenage years, refusing to bathe and walking around outside all night. He was given psychiatrist treatment on several

Issue
Were the actions of the defendant at or near the time of the incident both consistent with sanity and inconsistent with insanity?

Held
No. Defendant’s conviction is set aside.

Discussion
While the actions of the defendant at or near the time of the killing were arguably consistent with sanity, they were not also inconsistent with insanity. Therefore, the state did not produce enough evidence to meet and overcome evidence of insanity.

