Citation
530 U.S. 914, 120 S. Ct. 2597, 147 L. Ed. 2d 743, 2000 U.S.

Brief Fact Summary
The Respondent, Carhart (Respondent), asks for an injunction forbidding the enforcement of Nebraska’s statute banning so-called “partial birth abortions.”

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The State cannot ban abortion procedures categorically without exceptions for the mother’s health.

Facts
The Respondent is a Nebraska physician who performs abortions in a clinical setting. During the second trimester of pregnancy, the safest methods of abortion involve removal of at least some fetal tissue during the procedure and in some cases disarticulation, dismemberment, or collapse of fetal tissue to facilitate evacuation from the uterus. Nebraska criminalized the performance of any “partial birth” procedure in an abortion.

Issue
Does the Nebraska statute unduly burden a woman’s reproductive rights?

Held
Yes. Appeals Court ruling affirmed.

Dissent
Justice Antonin Scalia (J. Scalia) reiterates his belief that the Supreme Court of the United States’ (Supreme Court) abortion jurisprudence is judicial legislation.<br />	Justice Anthony Kennedy (J. Kennedy) suggests that the courts are ill-prepared to distinguish between various techniques for abortions.<br />	Justice Clarence Thomas (J. Thomas) believes the entire line of jurisprudence since Roe v. Wade, 410 U.S. 113 (1973), is misguided judicial activism.<br />Concurrence.<br />	Justice Sandra Day O’Connor (J. O’Connor) believes the statute is unconstitutional for two reasons: (1) there is no maternal health exception, and (2) its ban of the most common second trimester abortion technique imposes an undue burden on a woman’s right to choose.<br />	Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg (J. Ginsburg) quotes Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals Chief Judge Posner that the real target of the statutes in question is not a procedure, but rather the rights afforded by Roe, et. al.<br />

Discussion
The holding in Carhart is not an outlier. The Supreme Court is clear that there must always be a maternal health exception to any regulation of a woman’s right to have an abortion. Again, it is most likely the changing composition of the Supreme Court motivated pro life advocates to believe Roe might be overturned.

