Citation
434 U.S. 374; 98 S. Ct. 673; 54 L. Ed. 2d 618; 1978 U.S. 57; 24 Fed. R. Serv. 2d (Callaghan) 1313.

Brief Fact Summary
The Respondent, Redhail (Respondent), was denied a marriage license by the State of Wisconsin under a statute requiring a court order prior to marriage of Wisconsin residents with non-custodial minor children to whom they owe a duty of support.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Marriage is a fundamental right, which requires a compelling state interest and a sufficiently related means before the state may infringe upon it.

Facts
The Respondent has an out-of-wedlock minor daughter, for whom he is under a court order to provide monetary support. The Respondent has been unemployed for long periods of time and at the time of the suit is over $3,700 behind in his support payments. The Respondent’s marriage license of September 27, 1974 was denied on grounds that he did not procure a court order granting explicit permission for the marriage to proceed. It is uncontested that the Respondent could not receive such an order because of statutory limitations and his arrearages in child support.

Issue
Is the Wisconsin statute’s interference with the right to marry a violation of the Fourteenth Amendment’s Equal Protection Clause?

Held
Yes. Court of Appeals ruling affirmed.

Dissent
Justice William Rehnquist (J. Rehnquist) argues that marriage is not such a fundamental right as to trigger strictest scrutiny. He rather argues for rational basis review. J. Rehnquist argues that the statute at bar passes rational basis review.

Discussion
The three opinions given illustrate that the lens through which a case is viewed may result in vastly different analysis. The majority opinion focuses on two classes: Wisconsin residents without obligations to non-custodial, dependent minor children and Wisconsin residents with support obligations toward such children. J. Stewart’s concurrence does not view the case as one of discriminatory classifications, but one of unwarranted state intrusion into private matters of citizens. J. Rehnquist argues that marriage is not a fundamental right and thus Wisconsin is not producing a discriminatory class or intruding into personal liberties.

