Citation
Utah Sup. Ct., 62 Utah 226, 219 P. 539 (1923)

Brief Fact Summary
Allen (P) who was the official reporter for the Interstate Commerce Commission (Commission) alleged that a contacted was formed between him and Bissinger & Co (D) when Bissinger (D) accepted his offer for copies of the Commission’s official hearing reports relating to freight. This was however refuted by Bissinger (D) on the ground that there was no mutual assent between the two of them and therefore, there was no contract.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
By applying a reasonable standard, a contract exists where an acceptance, not exactly portraying an offer, refers to the subject matter of the offer, which gives rise to the parties having an intention to agree on the same thing.

Facts
Notices of the Interstate Commerce Commission (Commission) pertaining to freight matters were sent to major shippers, including Bissinger & Co (D) by Allen (P), who was the official reporter of the Commission. Allen (P) also included in the notices sent to the major shippers, an offer for copies of the official reports of the hearings. Bissinger (D) responded to Allen’s (P) offer in writing, stating “We will be interested in your official report of the different changes in the handling of the freight and would ask you to put our name down for the copy of same”.

Issue
By applying a reasonable standard, can a contract exist where an acceptance not exactly portraying an offer, which refers to the subject matter of the offer, give rise to the parties having an intention to agree on the same thing?

Held
Cherry, J). Yes. By applying a reasonable standard, a contract exists where an acceptance, not exactly portraying an offer, refers to the subject matter of the offer, gives rise to the parties having an intention to agree on the same thing. Bissinger (D) based his argument on the premise that both of them did not have the same intention of entering into a contract because the language of its letter, “official report of the different changes in the handling of freight” was different from the language in Allen’s (P) offer which was “a copy of the hearings”.

Discussion
The principle that absent fraud or misconduct on the offeror’s part, once an offeree has accepted the offer is made lucid in this case by the court and this would not excuse it of its bargain merely because the bargain turns out to be unprofitable or burdensome. Hence, the court did not grant the prayers of Bissinger (D) that there was no contract because the reports were “absolutely useless” and that it had not expected to receive a “library”.</span>

