Citation
492 F. 3d 912 (7th Cir. 2007)

Brief Fact Summary
Where parties’ communications evidence ongoing negotiations with no agreement reached as to key terms, such as price, quantity and monthly production volume, the Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C) states that such a contract for the sale of goods have not been formed.

Facts
Eaton Corp. (D), an automobile parts producer purchased different  components from E.C. Styberg Engineering Co. (Styberg) (P), a  manufacturer of components. Within a period of two years, Eaton (D) made  use of I-brake, a component which Styberg (P) had produced in certain  transmission it produced. Initially, I-brake prototype units were made  available to Eaton (D) who later commenced purchased of limited  quantities of I-brake unit for it to test how acceptable the product was  in the marketplace. Thereafter, Eaton (D) came to a decision to go into  the full production of I-brakes and both parties began negotiating an  agreement in which Styberg (P) was to produce I-brakes in commercial  quantities for Eaton (D). In order to embark on this capital intensive  project, Styberg (P) needed to get a minimum unit commitment from Eaton  (D) which resulted in both parties making frantic efforts through  e-mails, phone calls, letters and meetings in order to reach an  agreement.

Issue
Where parties’ communications evidence ongoing negotiations with no agreement reached as to key terms, such as price, quantity and monthly production volume, can it be said that a contract for the sale of goods is formed as stipulated under the Uniform Commercial Code?

Held
(Flaum, J) No. Where parties’ communications evidence ongoing negotiations with no agreement reached as to key terms, such as price, quantity and monthly production volume, the Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C) states that such a contract for the sale of goods have not been formed.  The ground upon which the district court gave judgment in favor of Eaton (D) and its legal conclusions was challenged by Styberg (P). But the ruling of the district court clearly did not run foul to the provisions of the relevant case laws and evidence that was available.  A contract for the sale of goods may actually be made in any manner sufficient to show agreement, including conduct by both parties which recognizes the existence of such contract as stipulated under U.C.C. S 2-204.

Discussion
this case portrays a typical scenario of ongoing negotiations where the formation of contract is at issue. The outcome of cases of this nature as it pertains to this particular case is not actually clear-cut. The reason why the court of appeals affirmed the ruling of the district court was because the choice of the district court between two reasonable interpretations of that evidence was not clearly erroneous. However, to be fair to Styberg (P), Styberg (P) held a strong reason in believing that Eaton (D) had agreed to the minimum 13,000 unit purchase agreement.

