Citation
Miss. Ct. App., 909 So. 2d 1267 (2005)

Brief Fact Summary
A contract that intended to pay Baker (P), a former employee of Marshall Durbin (D), his salary for five years upon the happening of certain triggering events was argued against by Marshall Durbin (D) because the contract lacked consideration.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Sufficient consideration to create an enforceable contract where one party has made an illusory promise and the second party has made a promise of a unilateral contract that is contingent on the first party’s performance where the first party has performed to fulfillment of the contingency supports an agreement.

Facts
Mr. Durbin, the proprietor of Marshall Durbin Food Corp. (the “Company”), had entered into an agreement with Baker (P), one of his former employee, during the period the Company (D) going concern was threatened. The agreement stipulated that upon the occurrence of certain triggering events, one of which was the incapacity of Mr. Durbin, Baker (P) would be entitled to five years of his then current salary. Part of the agreement stipulated how payments to be made to Baker (P) would be derived, an “effective date”, and that the contract was entered into for consideration of $10 and other valuable consideration. Also, the contract also made it clear that the agreement was not purported to create a contract of employment which although remained at will. These clauses in the agreement were however approved by the Company’s (D) board.

Issue
Is an agreement supported by sufficient consideration to create an enforceable contract where one party has made an illusory promise and the second party has made a promise of a unilateral contract that is contingent on the first party’s performance where the first party has performed to fulfillment of the contingency?

Held
(Branes, J) Yes. Sufficient consideration to create an enforceable contract where one party has made an illusory promise and the second party has made a promise of a unilateral contract that is contingent on the first party’s performance where the first party has performed to fulfillment of the contingency supports an agreement. The clause which stipulated hoe Baker’s (P) entitled would be calculated showed that consideration actually existed. On this premise, the Company (D) failed to make sufficient evidence available to challenge this provision and this gives the court enough reason to affirm its ruling as to the existence of consideration, this does not mean that the parties’ differences about the issue will not be addressed.

Discussion
The principle that the presence of an illusory promise does not destroy the possibility of a contract is illustrated by this case, which may give rise to a unilateral contract and the promisor who made the illusory promise (in this case, Baker (P)), can accept the contract performance. That illusory promise by one party gives rise to the return promise not been enforceable unless some other consideration is available is the view held by other courts.

