Citation
Fia. Ct. App., 985 So. 2d 1 (2007)

Brief Fact Summary
the removal of a limitation of liability clause on the back of the standardized finished goods contract of Paul Gottlieb & Co., Inc. did not materially alter the contract it had with Alps South Corp, (Alps) (D), so that as a matter of law, the clause should not have been removed from the contract, and therefore, the clause served to limit Gottlieb’s (P) liability to Alps (D) for consequential damages.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
the limitation of limited liability clause found on the back of a standardized contract for the sale of goods between merchants as stipulated under the Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) S 2-207, does not significantly alter the contract where it does not as a matter of law, cause unreasonable surprise or hardship.

Facts
Alps South Corp. (Alps) (D), a medical manufacturer of product liners used by amputees to attach prosthetic devices, began the test of different high-tech fabrics to enhance the durability and stability of its liners, of which Paul Gottlieb & Co., Inc. (Gottlieb) (P) who was into the production of specialty fabrics supplied Alps (D) with fabrics (D). Alps (D) finally settled for Gottlieb’s (P) “Coolmax” fabrics because it was highly patronized by its customers. But six months to this time, some fabric samples which Gottlieb submitted to Alps (D) was rejected on for the inconsistencies that was noticed in both the texture and the color. Alps (D) penned his dissatisfaction immediately to Gottlieb (P) stating that future commercial relationship mandated the provision of a more consistent product.

Issue
Does the limitation of limited liability clause found on the back of a standardized contract for the sale of goods between merchants as stipulated under the Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) S 2-207, significantly alter the contract where it does not as a matter of law, cause unreasonable surprise or hardship?

Held
(Casanueva, J.) No. The limitation of limited liability clause found on the back of a standardized contract for the sale of goods between merchants as stipulated under the Uniform Commercial Code (U.C.C.) S 2-207, does not significantly alter the contract where it does not as a matter of law, cause unreasonable surprise or hardship. The trial court reasoned in excluding the limitation clause that if effect was given to the clause, then the limitation of the liability “would allow Gottlieb to substitute a product without notice to Alps that would affect the final marketability of the final product”.

Discussion
Suit of this nature arises from the common, but risky, commercial practice in which the seller and buyer negotiate a contract involving goods through the exchange of standardized forms. The practice is governed by S 2-207 and it is called “the battle of forms”. This particular law seeks to solve the conflicting purchase order forms and acknowledgment and acceptance forms through the elimination of uncertainty. The battle lines are frequently occur where as in this case, the seller’s form contain terms which is not in consonance or additional to those set forth in the buyer’s form. Therefore, both parties normally end up in the court after they might have concluded the commercial transactions despite the differences in the form.

