Citation
Pa. Super. Ct., 895 A.2d 595 (2006)

Brief Fact Summary
Pennsy Supply, Inc. had received without charge, a hazardous material from American Ash Recycling Corp. of Pennsylvania (American Ash) (D). Pennsy’s Supply (P) argument is that, disposing of this hazardous material gives enough grounds to result in consideration which is necessary to support various breach of contract, warranty and merchantability claims

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Grounding contracts and warranty claims brought by the disposer, constitutes sufficient ground for relief of a manufacturer’s legal obligation, to dispose of a material classified as hazardous waste, such that the cost of disposal is avoided by the manufacturer.

Facts
Paving materials known as Treated Ash Aggregate (TAA) or AggRite, was obtained without cost from American Ash Recycling Corp. of Pennsylvania (American Ash) (D) by a paving subcontractor by name Pennsy Supply, Inc. (Pennsy) (P). These materials were used by the plaintiff in the construction project of driveways and parking lot in a school district.

Issue
<span>Does the grounding of contracts and warranty claims which was by brought by the disposer, constitute sufficient ground for a relief of a manufacturer’s legal obligation to dispose of a material classified as hazardous waste, such that the manufacturer avoids the cost of disposal?</span>

Held
(Orie Melvin, J). Yes. Grounding contracts and the warranty claims brought by the disposer, constitutes sufficient ground for relief of a manufacturer’s obligation, to dispose of a material classified as hazardous waste, such that the cost of disposal is avoided by the manufacturer. A very important element of an enforceable contract which must be bargained for as an exchange for a promise is consideration, which can be further defined as a benefit to the promisor or a detriment to the promise. That the promisee has suffered a legal disadvantage at the request of the promisor is not adequate. The disadvantage suffered by the promisee must be “quid pro quo” of the promise and the inducement for which it is made.

Discussion
the difference show between conduct that is a condition to a gift and conduct that constitutes consideration is not a clear one due to the fact that the very same conduct may be a condition to a gift or a consideration depending on how the parties treat the conduct. In determining which construction of the promise is more reasonable is an inquiry into whether the occurrence of the condition would be of advantage to the promisor. This is shown in 17A Am. Jur. 2d S 104 (2004 & 2005 Supp). as “(a)n aid which is not a conclusive test. When this is so, it is a fair inference that the occurrence was demanded as a consideration. Conversely, if the occurrence of the condition is not advantageous to the promisor but it is just to enable the promisee to take custody of the gift, the occurrence of the event on which the promise is conditional, which was brought about by the promisee by relying on the promise, is not properly construed as consideration.”

