Citation
22 Ill.201 Md. 115, 93 A.2d 272 (1952)

Brief Fact Summary
Defendant William G. Eurice & Bros., Inc., entered into a contract to build a house for Plaintiff Ray. After signing the contract, the parties disagreed as to which specifications were to be used.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Unilateral mistake, unlike mutual mistake, does not prevent the meeting of the minds required for contract formation.

Facts
Plaintiff decided to build a house and entered into negotiations with a number of builders, including Defendant. Following an estimate from Defendant, Plaintiff had plans for the house drawn up by an architect so as to get a final bid from Defendant. Plaintiff and Defendant discussed each item of the seven page specifications drawn up by Plaintiff’s architect. During the discussion, Defendant vetoed and changed some of the specifications. These changes were noted in green ink, and a copy of the specifications was given to Defendant to make a formal written bid. Defendant drew up a three page unsigned proposed contract which contradicted many of the specifications in the seven pages previously discussed by the parties. Plaintiff informed Defendant that his attorney would draw up the contract. Based on the seven page specifications and green ink changes, Plaintiff had the specifications rewritten into a five page “Memorandum Specifications”. The parties reviewed each item of the

Issue
Did the parties create an enforceable contract to build a house?

Held
Yes. The unilateral mistake of Defendant did not prevent the formation of an enforceable contract.

Discussion
In the present case, Defendant argued that a contract was not formed because the parties did not agree to the same specifications. The Court determines that the contract clearly indicated which specifications were to be used and that if there was a mistake, it was only on the part of Defendant. Because the mistake was unilateral, not bilateral, the mistake did not prevent the parties from creating an enforceable contract.

