Citation
22 Ill.448 So. 2d 1166 (Fla. 3d DCA 1984)

Brief Fact Summary
The Sholom House condominiums required the written consent of the condominium association’s board of directors to any sale, lease, assignment or transfer of a unit owner’s interest. Bertha Albares, a member of the board of directors, sold her condominium to Defendant Aquarian Foundation, without obtaining the required written consent.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Despite the law’s recognition of the particular desirability of restrictions on the right of transfer in the context of condominium living, such restrictions will be invalidated when found to violate some external public policy of constitutional right of the individual.

Facts
The Sholom House condominiums required the written consent of the condominium association’s board of directors to any sale, lease, assignment or transfer of a unit owner’s interest. Bertha Albares, a member of the board of directors, sold her condominium to Defendant Aquarian Foundation, without obtaining the required written consent. The board of directors was expressly empowered by the declaration of condominium to “arbitrarily, capriciously, or unreasonably” withhold its consent to any proposed sale, sued to set aside Albares’ sale of the condominium to Defendant Aquarian Foundation, to dispossess Defendant and to recover damages under the following clause, “In the event of a violation . . . by the unit owner of any of the covenant, restrictions and limitations, contained in this declaration, then in that event the fee simple title to the condominium parcel shall immediately revert to the association, subject to the association paying to said former unit owner, the fair app

Issue
Does the clause in the condominium declaration constitute an unreasonable restraint on alienation such that enforcement of the clause is barred as against public policy?

Held
Yes. Judgment reversed.

Discussion
Cases involving restraints on alienation must be carefully decided so as to avoid judicial sanction of discrimination in housing. The Court in this case did not discuss the implications of allowing the association’s clause to stand, but it would be wise to consider such implicatio

