Citation
22 Ill.421 Pa. 207, 218 A.2d 338 (1966)

Brief Fact Summary
A grant by deed in 1947 made by Joyce King of property known as “King Farm” was made to two couples as tenants by the entirety. The language of the deed after the two tenancies by the entirety was created included the words “with right of survivorship. The parties’ dispute centered on whether the couple’s respective one-half interests were held as tenants in common or as joint tenants.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The case law of this jurisdiction dictate that, when construing language in a deed, there must be a sufficiently clear expression of an intent to create a right of survivorship, because the law does not favor joint tenancies.

Facts
By deed in 1947, Joyce King conveyed property known as King Farm to Harry Michael and Bertha Michael, husband and wife, and Ford Michael (son of Harry and Bertha) and Helen Michael, husband and wife. After the grant to each respective couple the deed stated the couple’s interest was as tenants by the entirety. Then, after the second couple was mentioned, these words appeared: “with right of survivorship.” Harry Michael died prior to 1962 leaving to survive him his wife Bertha Michael and two sons, Ford Michael (one of the grantees) and Robert Michael, the Appellant. Bertha Michael died testate in 1963 and under her will Robert Michael was to take her interest in King Farm and Ford Michael, Appellee, was to receive $1,000 to balance the gift. The two sons Appellant Robert Michael and Appellee Ford Michael were appointed as executors of Bertha’s will. A dispute arose over what interest, if any, Bertha owned in King Farm which would pass to Robert Michael. Robert Michael argued t

Issue
What is the proper characterization of the relationship created by the 1947 deed between the two couples?

Held
The land was held as tenants in common as between the two couples. Decree reversed.

Discussion
In order to understand these cases, it is absolutely necessary to have a working knowledge of the terms “tenants in common,” “joint tenancy,” and “tenants by the entirety.” The definitions of the these terms and the incidents to each type of ownership are found beginning on page 311.

