Citation
22 Ill.23 Ill. 2d 52, 177 N.E.2d 194 (1961)

Brief Fact Summary
Neil Duffy conveyed land under his will in 1936 to his three sisters Nellie Duffy, Anna Duffy and Katherine O’Connell as joint tenants. Thereafter Nellie conveyed, prior to her death, her interest to Anna. When Anna died in 1957, she conveyed whatever interest she had in the land to her four nieces, Plaintiffs Beatrice Jackson, Eileen O’Barski, Catherine Young and Margaret Miller.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
When one cotenant in a joint tenancy conveys his part to another cotenant (and there are more than two cotenants) the joint tenancy is only severed as to the portion so conveyed and the original grant which created the joint tenancy remains in force and effect as to the remaining portions which were not conveyed.

Facts
Neil Duffy conveyed land under his will in 1936 to his three sisters Nellie Duffy, Anna Duffy and Katherine O’Connell as joint tenants. Thereafter Nellie conveyed, prior to her death, her interest to Anna. When Anna died in 1957, she conveyed whatever interest she had in the land to her four nieces, Plaintiffs Beatrice Jackson, Eileen O’Barski, Catherine Young and Margaret Miller. When Anna Duffy died the Plaintiffs instituted this suit in order to have the land partitioned. The Plaintiffs contended that Nellie’s quitclaim deed to Anna in 1948 severed the joint tenancy existing between the three sisters in the land and that the result was that Anna became owner of an undivided two-thirds interest in the land and that Defendant Katherine O’Connell had an undivided one-third interest in the land. Further, that Plaintiffs (four nieces of Anna) as successors in interest of Anna Duffy had an undivided one-sixth interest apiece and Defendant an undivided one-third interest as tenant

Issue
What effect on the rights of the parties did Nellie’s quitclaim deed have?

Held
The Court affirmed the decision of the master favoring the view of the Defendant.

Discussion
When partition is prayed for in a complaint, the first object of the court’s inquiry is usually to make a determination of the interests held by each party. This case differs from the ordinary rule on joint tenancies, which is that the property held in joint tenancy is owned as a corporate unity and not as undivided individual parts. See page 312 in the book for a discussion of this concept.

