Citation
22 Ill.156 Me. 103, 161 A.2d 837 (1960)

Brief Fact Summary
The Federal Land Bank of Springfield (one of the Defendants) conveyed property to Nathan Palmer and his wife Alice Palmer (now Alice Flint the other Defendant) which contained the following language in the deed: “Unto the said Nathan H. Palmer and Alice E. Palmer as joint tenants, and not as tenants in common, to them and their assigns and to the survivor, and the heirs and assigns of the survivor forever.” This deed also conveyed a warranty that the grantor, its successors and assigns “shall and will warrant and defend the same to the said grantees their heirs and assigns forever.” Then, Alice and Nathan were divorced and by quitclaim deed without covenant in 1951, Alice conveyed the premises to Nathan, who then conveyed the premises to Frank Palmer, who reconveyed the premises to Nathan and his sister Roxa Palmer (Plaintiff) “as joint tenants and not as tenants in common, to them and their heirs and assigns, and to the survivor of them, and to the heirs and assi

Synopsis of Rule of Law
When the intent of the parties to a deed or conveyance, where the grantor conveys a fee, is clear and convincing as to their intent to create a joint tenancy, then a joint tenancy is created, and the right of survivorship is not to be considered a contingent remainder.

Facts
The Federal Land Bank of Springfield (one of the Defendants) conveyed property to Nathan Palmer and his wife Alice Palmer (now Alice Flint the other Defendant) which contained the following language in the deed: “Unto the said Nathan H. Palmer and Alice E. Palmer as joint tenants, and not as tenants in common, to them and their assigns and to the survivor, and the heirs and assigns of the survivor forever.” This deed also conveyed a warranty that the grantor, its successors and assigns “shall and will warrant and defend the same to the said grantees their heirs and assigns forever.” Then, Alice and Nathan were divorced and by quitclaim deed without covenant in 1951, Alice conveyed the premises to Nathan, who then conveyed the premises to Frank Palmer, who reconveyed the premises to Nathan and his sister Roxa Palmer (Plaintiff) “as joint tenants and not as tenants in common, to them and their heirs and assigns, and to the survivor of them, and to the heirs and assigns of such s

Issue
What is the correct status of the parties as to the property?

Held
The Plaintiff is the owner in fee. Appeal allowed and case remanded with instructions.

Discussion
This case provides a good discussion of the joint tenancy, which is an essential concept in property law.

