Citation
22 Ill.164 Cal.App.2d 591, 330 P.2d 858 (Ct. App. 1958)

Brief Fact Summary
The Appellant Elaine Wilson and Calvert Wilson (now deceased) owned property as joint tenants until the death of Calvert in 1955. Prior to Calvert’s death, the couple separated in July of 1954, and thereafter, without Elaine’s knowledge or consent, Calvert executed a promissory note to his parents (Respondents) for $6,440, and then delivered a mortgage to his parents on the property in question.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
In this jurisdiction the act of mortgaging property by one of the tenants in a joint tenancy is not sufficient to sever the tenancy, and the interest of the mortgagee will terminate if the mortgaging tenant dies before the non-mortgaging tenant.

Facts
The Appellant Elaine Wilson and Calvert Wilson (now deceased) owned property as joint tenants until the death of Calvert in 1955. Prior to Calvert’s death, the couple separated in July of 1954, and thereafter, without Elaine’s knowledge or consent, Calvert executed a promissory note to his parents (Respondents) for $6,440, and then delivered a mortgage to his parents on the property in question. In 1956 the People of the State of California commenced this action to condemn the property. The People, in its complaint, alleged that Elaine Wilson was the owner of the real property in question and that the parents of Calvert were the mortgagees thereof. Elaine answered the complaint and alleged that she was the owner of the property and that the Respondents had no right or interest or title to the property. The parents of Calvert alleged that they were the owners and holders of the mortgage executed by Calvert and that the mortgage should be satisfied from the proceeds of the conde

Issue
Does the execution of a mortgage by one joint tenant terminate the joint tenancy?

Held
No. Judgment reversed.

Discussion
Consider the equities present in this case. Elaine was an innocent spouse who had no idea that the property had been mortgaged. The Court seemed to desire a result which would not harm Elaine’s interest and reward Calvert and his parents for Calvert’s non-disclosure of the mortgage and promissory note.

