Citation
26 N.Y.2d 1020 1970 N.Y.

Brief Fact Summary
Atlantic Cement Co.’s (Defendant’s) cement company emitted a large amount of dirt, dust and vibrations, which gave cause to a nuisance. Numerous landowners (Plaintiffs) brought suit to enjoin Defendant from operating his plant.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
An injunction is not the appropriate remedy in a nuisance case when the defendant is providing an essential product or service to the public. An award of permanent damages is better suited.

Facts
Defendant operated a cement plant. This plant emitted a large amount of dirt, smoke, and vibrations, affecting a group of landowners. Plaintiffs brought suit to enjoin Defendant from operating the plant. The court found that the cement plant constituted a nuisance, and that there was substantial damage to Plaintiffs. The court awarded Plaintiffs permanent damages of $185,000.00 and refused to issue an injunction. The trial court reasoned that the total damage to Plaintiffs was small when compared to the value of Defendant’s operation. Plaintiffs appealed.

Issue
Must an injunction be issued when a nuisance has been determined to exist and when there are substantial damages shown by the party complaining of the interference?

Held
No. Judgment reversed and remanded as to the award of permanent damages.

Dissent
(Justice Jasen) This long-standing rule should not be changed when substantial damages are involved. The majority is licensing a continuing wrong. Once these damages are paid, there will be no incentive to alleviate the wrong. Defendant should be given a reasonable time to abate the nuisance, otherwise it should be enjoined.

Discussion
The majority in this case forced the parties into a settlement. In essence, the Plaintiff will hold Defendant hostage. Plaintiff will seek money out of Defendant. The cement plant will not be shut down. The nuisance will continue and there will be no incentive to abate it. The result that the majority reaches allows Defendant to continue his nuisance so long as it pays for it. As the majority pointed out, courts issue injunctions when a nuisance has been proven. This case is a departure from precedent.

