Citation
229 F.3d 831, 84 FEP Cases 129 (9th Cir. 2000)

Brief Fact Summary
Dr. Golde (Defendant) removed Moore’s (Plaintiff’s) spleen and blood products to save his life. Defendant knew that these blood products had great economic value. Defendant deceived Plaintiff and developed the cells without his consent. Plaintiff sued for conversion and failure to disclose.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
To establish conversion, Plaintiff must establish an actual interference with his ownership or right of possession. If Plaintiff has neither title nor possession, he may not maintain an action for conversion.

Facts
Plaintiff visited UCLA Medical Center shortly after he learned that he had hairy-cell leukemia. Defendant removed Plaintiff’s spleen to save his life. Even before the operation, Golde and Quan (Defendant), a researcher for the University of California, both knew that Plaintiff’s blood products could have great commercial uses unrelated to his medical research. Plaintiff flew from Seattle to UCLA several times because he was told that it was necessary and required for his well-being. However, these visits were designed to collect more research materials. Defendants then developed and patented a cell line from Plaintiff’s cells and licensed them for commercial development. The commercial rights were substantial and included cash payments and stock options. Plaintiff alleged that Defendants failed to disclose preexisting research and economic interests in the cells before obtaining consent to the medical procedures. Plaintiff also seeks to impose liability upon Defendants for the

Issue
There are two issues in this case:

Held
No, Defendant is not liable for conversion. Yes, Defendants must disclose.

Dissent
There are two dissenting opinions.

Discussion
In this case, the majority was fearful in imposing liability on the Defendants under the theory of conversion and strict liability. The court did not want to penalize researchers who were working on cures for diseases. If the court had found Defendants liable for conversion, the damage award would have been astronomical. If Plaintiff has neither title nor possession, he may not maintain an action for conversion.

