Citation
273 Ind. 518, 406 N.E.2d 625, 1980 Ind. 66 Oil & Gas Rep. 468

Brief Fact Summary
An act of the legislature of Indiana, called the Mineral Lapse Act (the Act), put an end to interests in minerals, which have not been used for twenty years. The lower court found the Act to be contrary to due process, equal protection and the guarantee of just compensation for property taken for the state.<span class="heading">Synopsis of Rule of Law.</span> The courts may not sit as a super legislature to judge the wisdom or desirability of legislative policy, where such determinations do not impact fundamental rights nor a suspect classification.

Facts
The Act put an end to interests in minerals, which have not been used for twenty years. The lower court found the Act to be contrary to due process, equal protection, and the guarantee of just compensation for property taken for the state.<span class="heading">Issue.</span> Is the Act unconstitutional?

Citation
736 So. 2nd 1167 (Fla. 1999).<span class="heading">Brief Fact Summary.</span> The Plaintiff, H & F Land, Inc. (Plaintiff), filed a lawsuit to assert a way by necessity 56 years after its predecessor in title conveyed land to the Defendant, Panama City-Bay County Airport and Industrial District (Defendant), but left a small portion of land in itself, which belongs to the Plaintiff and is landlocked and waterlocked. The Defendant filed a motion for summary judgment based on the Marketable Record Title to Real Property Act (MRTA), which provides that when a right of way by necessity is not asserted within thirty years the claim is extinguished. The trial court and the intermediate appellate court granted and affirmed the Defendant’s motion and the Plaintiff appealed.<span class="heading">Synopsis of Rule of Law.</span> A way of necessity results from the application of the presumption that whenever a party conveys property he conveys whatever is necessary for the beneficial use of that property and retains whatever is necessary for the beneficial use of the land he still possesses.<br />

Held
No. Judgments of trial court reversed and cases remanded for enforcement of the Act.

Discussion
This case provides a good discussion of the mechanisms of constitutional procedure where an act is challenged. The police power of the legislature was found sufficient to support the Act and the parties challenging the Act could not make the required showing that the Act was unconstitutional.H & F Land, Inc. v. Panama City-Bay County Airport

Brief Fact Summary
The Plaintiff, H & F Land, Inc. (Plaintiff), filed a lawsuit to assert a way by necessity 56 years after its predecessor in title conveyed land to the Defendant, Panama City-Bay County Airport and Industrial District (Defendant), but left a small portion of land in itself, which belongs to the Plaintiff and is landlocked and waterlocked. The Defendant filed a motion for summary judgment based on the Marketable Record Title to Real Property Act (MRTA), which provides that when a right of way by necessity is not asserted within thirty years the claim is extinguished. The trial court and the intermediate appellate court granted and affirmed the Defendant’s motion and the Plaintiff appealed.<span class="heading">Synopsis of Rule of Law.</span> A way of necessity results from the application of the presumption that whenever a party conveys property he conveys whatever is necessary for the beneficial use of that property and retains whatever is necessary for the beneficial use of the land he still possesses.

Facts
The Plaintiff filed a lawsuit to assert a way by necessity 56 years after its predecessor in title conveyed land to the Defendant, but left a small portion of land in itself, which belongs to the Plaintiff and is landlocked and waterlocked. The Defendant filed a motion for summary judgment based on the MRTA, which provides that when a right of way by necessity is not asserted within thirty years the claim is extinguished. The trial court and the intermediate appellate court granted and affirmed the Defendant’s motion and the Plaintiff appealed.<span class="heading">Issue.</span> Does the MRTA operate to extinguish an otherwise valid claim of a common law way of necessity when such claim was not asserted within thirty years?

