Citation
22 Ill.250 F.2d 51 (10th Cir. 1957)

Brief Fact Summary
In this case, the Plaintiff Spears (Plaintiff) brought a diversity action to cancel a deed and quiet her title to an undivided one-half interest in 320 acres of land in New Mexico, on the grounds that her name to the deed granting an interest to the Defendants, various members of the Madrid family (Defendants), was forged. The Defendants denied the forgery, but alternatively pleaded they had made valuable improvements in good faith under color of title and the Plaintiff was estopped by the doctrine of laches to assert her title. Plaintiff, in responsive pleading, admitted the valuable improvements for which the Defendants were entitled to credit, but alleged that the Defendants had realized large profits from the land during the years 1952, 1953, 1954 and 1955 and that the Defendants should be made to account for such profits.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A good faith improver is entitled to compensation for his improvements “measured not by the cost of the improvements, but by the amount to which they have enhanced the value of the owner’s estate, less the land profits of the land.” [24 A.L.R. 2nd 14, 31].

Facts
In this case the Plaintiff brought a diversity action to cancel a deed and quiet her title to an undivided one-half interest in 320 acres of land in New Mexico, on the grounds that her name to the deed granting an interest to the Defendants. The Defendants denied the forgery, but alternatively pleaded they had made valuable improvements in good faith under color of title and the Plaintiff was estopped by the doctrine of laches to assert her title. The Plaintiff, in her responsive pleading, admitted the valuable improvements for which Defendants were entitled to credit, but alleged that Defendants had realized large profits from the land during the years 1952, 1953, 1954 and 1955 and that the Defendants should be made to account for such profits. The lower court found that the deed was in fact a forgery and that the Plaintiff was entitled to a one-half interest in the land. The lower court also found that the Defendants had, prior to notice of forgery, made valuable improvement

Issue
What is the proper measure of damages?

Held
The Plaintiff is not entitled to recover rental profits. Affirmed.

Discussion
Clearly, the Defendants here should be entitled to improvements made in good faith under color of title. As the Court noted, the rules established and discussed herein are departures from the old rule that any interloper is entitled to take nothing, regardless of whether he made improvements under color of title in good faith. The Court found that the earlier rule had unduly harsh results.

