Citation
22 Ill.9 Ill. 2d 441, 137 N.E.2d 815 (1956)

Brief Fact Summary
This case involved a dispute between the Plaintiffs, the widow and children of Fred Mercer, deceased (Plaintiffs) and the Defendants, surviving sons of Lora Wayman, deceased, and the widow and daughter of Verne Wayman, deceased (Defendants), to set aside oil and gas leases by the Defendants and to have the Plaintiffs declared the sole owners of the 40 acre tract in question.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The rule is well settled that the mere possession by one tenant in common who receives all the rents and profits and pays the taxes assessed against the property, no matter how long a period, cannot be set up as a bar against the cotenants.

Facts
This case involved a dispute between the Plaintiffs and the Defendants to set aside oil and gas leases by the Defendants and to have the Plaintiffs declared the sole owners of the 40-acre tract in question. Originally, the tract was owned in fee simple by John Mercer, who died intestate, leaving him with sole heirs at law his widow, five sons and two daughters. Thereafter, one of the daughters, Lora Wayman, died intestate and was survived by Oscar Wayman, husband, and three minor sons, Verne Wayman, June Wayman and Paul Wayman. On May 7, 1920, the widow of John Mercer, four of the sons and the surviving daughter, together with their spouses, joined in a quitclaim deed conveying the 40-acre tract to the remaining son Fred Mercer and wife. Oscar Wayman, husband of the deceased Lora Wayman, joined in the conveyance individually and as “father and natural guardian of Verne Wayman, June Wayman and Paul Wayman, children of Lora Wayman, deceased.” The deed purported to convey “all in

Issue
Are the Defendants’ claims barred by the statute of limitations?

Held
No. Reversed.

Discussion
This case illustrates the need for adequate legal representation in the preparation of deeds. Consider that the father of the Defendants intended to convey the minors’ interest in the land and there was evidence of that intent. However, because the father did not perform the quitclaim in a legally sufficient fashion, the minors retained an interest. Would the father have quitclaimed his own interest, but intended that his minor sons retain an interest?

