Citation
22 Ill.76 Ill. 2d 31, 27 Ill. Dec. 746, 389 N.E.2d 1154 (1979)

Brief Fact Summary
In April 1972, the Plaintiffs Raymond Peterson (Mr. Peterson) and Delores Petersen (Plaintiffs), entered into a contract for $71,000 with the Defendant, Hubschman Construction (Defendant), for the purchase of a piece of land and to have a home constructed thereupon. The Plaintiffs paid $10,000 in earnest money and there was an offset of $9,000 for work done by Mr. Petersen. The Plaintiffs became dissatisfied with the Defendant’s performance and the Defendant agreed to repair numerous problems on a “punch list,” but failed to satisfactorily carry out the agreement.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
In the sale of a new house by a builder-vendor there is an implied warranty of habitability, which will support an action against the builder-vendor by the vendee for latent defects and which will avoid the unjust results of caveat emptor and the merger rule.

Facts
In April 1972, the Plaintiffs entered into a contract for $71,000 with the Defendant for the purchase of a piece of land and to have a home constructed thereupon. The Plaintiffs paid $10,000 in earnest money and there was an offset of $9,000 for work done by Mr. Petersen. The Plaintiffs became dissatisfied with the Defendant’s performance and Defendant agreed to repair numerous problems on a “punch list,” but failed to satisfactorily carry out the agreement. The trial court found that the defects consisted of a basement floor pitched away from the drain, improperly installed siding, a defective and ill-fitting bay window, a seriously defective front door, deterioration and “nail popping” of the drywall. The testimony showed that repair of those items would include a large amount of work. The Plaintiffs proposed to place $1,000 in escrow to ensure that the repairs were done, but the Defendant refused. The Plaintiffs refused to close the deal and the Defendant informed the Plain

Issue
May the builder raise the non-breach of the implied warranty of habitability to enforce the forfeiture, insofar as the home was livable, though not well-made?

Held
No. Judgment affirmed.

Discussion
The Court based its decision to expand the application of the implied warranty of habitability on the changes in the sale and construction of homes. The Court found that, under the old rules, the result would be unduly harsh to the Plaintiffs. This decision shows the way in which judicial decisions tend to change over time.

