Citation
22 Ill.103 Wn.2d 409, 693 P.2d 697 (1985)

Brief Fact Summary
The Plaintiff, Transamerica Title Insurance Co. (Plaintiff), in this subrogation suit is a title insurance company and the Defendant, Johnson (Defendant), is the seller-grantor of three parcels of land and the insureds were the purchasers-grantees. The Plaintiff failed to except from coverage a sewer assessment lien on each parcel. The Plaintiff paid the three assessments and then sued the Defendant under subrogation rights, which simply means that any rights, which the purchaser-grantees might have against the Defendant, are subrogated to the Plaintiff.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A title insurance company is liable on a duty to search and disclose only when the non-insured (Defendant herein) has shown foreseeable reliance upon the preliminary commitment or upon the representation of the title insurance company.

Facts
The Plaintiff in this subrogation suit is a title insurance company and the Defendant is the seller-grantor of three parcels of land and the insureds were the purchasers-grantees. The Plaintiff failed to except from coverage a sewer assessment lien on each parcel. The Plaintiff paid the three assessments and then sued the Defendant under subrogation rights, which simply means that any rights which the purchaser-grantees might have against the Defendant are subrogated to the Plaintiff. The Defendant is a developer who purchased vacant lots for the purpose of building homes thereupon. When the purchase had been made, preliminary sewer district assessments had been made and the preliminary assessments were disclosed in title insurance policies issued by another title insurer, which the Defendant received. The Defendant’s corporate president testified in deposition that he knew about the assessments and knew that when the three parcels were purchased, the parcels would have been s

Issue
Does the Plaintiff have any liability to the Defendant for its negligence in not disclosing the assessments?

Held
No. Judgment affirmed.

Discussion
The Court perhaps found the conduct of the Defendant to be persuasive as to the lack of reliance on the preliminary commitment of the Plaintiff title insurer. Note that the Defendant had actual knowledge of the assessments prior to the issuance of the policy herein and that Defendant initially listed the property as being sold subject to the sewer assessments, but later deleted that portion. The Court seemed to find a pattern of avoiding the assessment by any possible means on the part of the Defendant.

