Citation
22 Ill.40 Cal.3d 870, 221 Cal.Rptr. 509, 710 P.2d 309 (1985)

Brief Fact Summary
In this case, the Plaintiffs’, Brian and Helen White (Plaintiffs), predecessor in title had granted an easement deed for subsurface water rights. The Plaintiffs were unaware of the easement at the time of the sale. The Plaintiffs were issued title insurance by the Defendant, Western Title Insurance Co. (Defendant) and neither policy (there were two lots) mentioned the easement. The title insurance policy stated that it would protect the Plaintiffs against title being vested in a person other than the Plaintiffs and against any defect in or lien or encumbrance on title.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The Court found that under negligence law, the Defendant had a duty to list all matters of public record regarding the subject property in its preliminary report. The title insurer is liable for his negligent failure to list recorded encumbrances in preliminary title reports.

Facts
In this case, the Plaintiffs’ predecessor in title had granted an easement deed for subsurface water rights and Plaintiffs was unaware of the easement at the time of the sale. The Plaintiffs were issued title insurance and neither policy (there were two lots) mentioned the easement. The title insurance policy stated that it would protect the Plaintiffs against title being vested in a person other than the Plaintiffs and against any defect in or lien or encumbrance on title. The title insurance, issued by the Defendant, also purported to exclude from coverage any loss arising from easements which were not shown by the public record (the easement in this case was recorded) and from water rights or claims to title to water. The easement holder notified the Plaintiffs of its intention to enter the land and utilize the easement. The Plaintiffs notified the Defendant, and Defendant agreed to defend. However, Plaintiffs rejected the Defendant’s offer to defend and hired their own cou

Issue
Under the facts presented, is the Defendant liable to the Plaintiffs?

Held
Yes. Judgment affirmed.

Dissent
The dissent disagreed with the Court’s decision to allow the jury to consider evidence of prior settlement offers by the Defendant. The evidence of prior settlement offers would potentially confuse jurors who might feel that such offers are admissions of liability.

Discussion
The opinion sets out in great detail the various acts, which led to the jury’s finding that the Defendant had breached the covenant of good faith and fair dealing. Ordinarily, offers to compromise are excluded from introduction as evidence in a case in chief. The Court found a pattern of conduct on the part of the Defendant to evade responsibility for its omission of the easement in the preliminary title report.

