Citation
22 Ill.2001-NMCA-017, 130 N.M. 214, 22 P.3d 682

Brief Fact Summary
Peter Wallis (Plaintiff) brought an action against Kellie Ray Smith (Defendant) for money damages, asserting fraud, breach of contract, conversion and prima facie tort. The district court dismissed for failure to state a claim upon which relief can be granted. Plaintiff appeals.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Public policy does not permit a court to require a mother to indemnify the father for child support.

Facts
Plaintiff and Defendant were in a consensual sexual relationship. They discussed contraceptive techniques and agreed that Defendant would use birth control pills. They also agreed that their sexual intimacy would only last as long as Defendant continued taking the birth control pills because Plaintiff made it clear he did not want to be a father. Plaintiff relied on Defendant to use birth control and took no precautions himself. Defendant stopped taking the birth control pills but never informed the Plaintiff of her decision. Their relationship continued and Defendant became pregnant and subsequently gave birth to a baby girl. Plaintiff alleges that he suffered and continues to suffer substantial economic injury as a result of his unintended fatherhood because New Mexico requires him to pay child support. He further alleges that he has been injured by Defendant’s conduct and requests compensatory and punitive damages from her. The district court determined that public policy p

Issue
Whether public policy would permit the court to require Defendant to indemnify Plaintiff for child support?

Held
No. Judgment is affirmed and imposition of sanctions is reversed.

Discussion
The discovery violations for which the sanctions were reversed were for Plaintiff’s lengthy interrogatories to provide the names of all of Defendant’s medical providers. The court granted a motion made by Defendant to quash the subpoenas and sanctioned Plaintiff with a $1,000.00 fine for seeking the materials by a subpoena after Defendant had raised a privilege objection. The court of appeals held that a party may not use a rule to pursue discovery of privileged materials that is the subject of ongoing discovery that has not been resolved by the parties or decided by the

