Citation
22 Ill.381 Mass. 284, 408 N.E.2d 1370 (1980)

Brief Fact Summary
Zapatha (Plaintiff) brought an action to enjoin termination of the agreement and alleged that the contract provision purporting to authorize the termination of the franchise agreement without cause was unconscionable and that Dairy Mart, Inc.’s (Defendant) conduct was unfair and deceptive. The judge ruled that Defendant did not act in good faith, that their termination of the agreement without cause was unfair and deceptive, and the contract provision was unconscionable. Defendant made an application to this court for appellate review, which was granted.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A termination clause to terminate without cause is not per se unconscionable as long as reasonable notice is given.

Facts
Plaintiff’s action alleged that the contract provision, which authorized the termination of the franchise agreement between Plaintiff and Defendant without cause was unconscionable and that Defendant’s termination was unfair and deceptive. Plaintiff also sought to enjoin termination of the franchise agreement. Plaintiff had a high school diploma and attended one year of college. He was an operator’s manager for a company in the business of electroplating. After being discharged from that job, he met with a representative of the defendant who told him about the opportunity to run a Dairy Mart franchise. Defendant approved Plaintiff’s application and offered him a store. The franchise agreement had a termination provision which allowed either party, after twelve months, to terminate the agreement without cause on ninety days’ written notice. If termination without cause occurred, the Defendant agreed to repurchase the saleable merchandise at retail prices. Defendant’s representa

Issue
Whether the termination clause of the agreement to terminate without cause was unconscionable?

Held
Judgment reversed.

Discussion
The Restatement (Second) Section 208 states that if a contract or term is unconscionable at the time the contract is made a court may refuse to enforce the contract or enforce the remainder of the contract without that specific term. Section 205 states that every contract imposes a requirement of good faith and fair dealings in its performance and enforcement.

