Citation
248 U.S. 215, 39 S. Ct. 68, 63 L. Ed. 211, 1918 U.S.

Brief Fact Summary
Defendant took Plaintiff’s published news and sold it to Defendant’s clients. Plaintiff sued Defendant for unfair competition.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Defendant’s process amounts to an unauthorized interference with the normal operation of complainant’s legitimate business precisely at the point where the profit is to be reaped, in order to divert a material portion of the profit from those who have earned it to those who have not; with special advantage to Defendant in the competition because of the fact that it is not burdened with any part of the expense of gathering the news.

Facts
The parties are competitors in the gathering and distribution of the news and its publication for profit in newspapers throughout the U.S. Associated Press (Plaintiff) was engaged in the business of gathering and disseminating news to its constituent members. The total cost of Plaintiff’s service was about $3,500,000 annum. Its individual members shared in that cost. Each member agreed by Plaintiff’s bylaws that news received through the service was received exclusively for publication in a newspaper and that no other use would be made of the information in advance of the publication. Each member was also required to gather news in his district and supply it to Plaintiff and no one else. International (Defendant) is in the same business as Plaintiff. They were competitors. It is obvious from the facts that the information gathered had time sensitive value and that there would be enormous competitive advantage to get the story published first. Associated Press (Plaintiff) sued

Issue
Does Defendant’s admitted course of conduct in appropriating, for commercial use, matter taken from bulletins or early editions of Associated Press publications constitute unfair competition in trade?

Held
Yes. Judgment for Plaintiff.

Dissent
(J. Brandeis) News is a report of recent occurrences. The general rule of law is, that the noblest of human productions – knowledge, truths ascertained, conceptions, and ideas – become, after voluntary communication to others, free as the air to common use. Defendant’s taking and gainful use of a product of another which, for reasons of public policy, the law has refused to endow with the attributes of property, does not become unlawful because the product happens to have been taken from a rival and is used in competition with him.

Discussion
In this case, Defendant’s conduct is considered unfair competition because if Defendant were to permit to use Plaintiff’s research without compensation, there would be no reason for Plaintiff to gather the news. Defendant’s business seeks only to free ride off the Plaintiff’s effort and reap the benefits.

