Citation
23 Q.B.D. 598 (1889), affirmed [1892] A.C. 25.

Brief Fact Summary
Defendant lowered prices and offered incentive in an attempt to drive Plaintiff from the market. Plaintiff sued Defendant for unfair competition.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Competition, however severe and egotistical, if unattended by circumstances of dishonesty, intimidation, molestation, or such illegalities gives rise to no cause of action at common law.

Facts
Defendants are a number of ship-owners who formed themselves into a league or conference for the purpose of ultimately keeping the control of the tea carriage from certain Chinese ports and for the purpose of driving Plaintiffs and other competitors from the field. Defendants accomplished their goals by offering local shippers very low rates thus rendering it unprofitable for Plaintiffs to send their ships there. Furthermore they also offered a 5 percent rebate to all local shippers and agents who would deal exclusively with them with a penalty of forfeiture of that rebate for the entire year if any straying occurred. Defendants had no personal ill-will to the Plaintiffs, nor any desire to harm them except such as is involved in the wish and intention to discourage by such measures the Plaintiffs form sending rival vessels to such ports.

Issue
Is there a cause of action for unfair competition when that competition complained of consists of a price confederation that wants to control shipping of goods by lowering prices?

Held
No. Judgment for Defendant.

Dissent
(Lord Esher, M.R.) The act of Defendants in lowering their freights far beyond a lowering for any purpose of trade – that is to say, so low that I they continued it they themselves could not carry on trade – was not an act done in the exercises of their own free right of trade, but was an act done evidently for the purpose of interfering with, i.e. with intent to interfere with, Plaintiffs’ right to a free course of trade.

Discussion
This case is one of the first cases in which Defendants have been sued for entering into a scheme of predatory pricing, i.e., a practice of selling below cost in the short run in hope of obtaining monopoly gains later, after driving the competition from the market. The Court held for Defendants because their practices did not involve the use of forbidden means, fraud, misrepresentation, intimidation, obstruction, or molestation. The modern view of predation asks the further question of whether predation constitutes an activity that is likely to cause social losses, and, if so, whether a court is capable of distinguishing between the predation and ordinary competition. Predation is not an effective way for a company to gain market power.

