Citation
359 Mass. 319, 268 N.E.2d 860, 1971 Mass.

Brief Fact Summary
After shopping in Kennedy’s Inc.’s (Defendant’s) store, Coblyn (Plaintiff) was leaving when Defendant stopped him. Defendant thought Plaintiff was attempting to steal an ascot. Plaintiff was hospitalized and sued Defendant for false imprisonment.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Any demonstration of physical power, which, to all appearances, can be avoided only by submission, operates as a false imprisonment. Defendant has a privilege to detain Plaintiff if done in a reasonable manner, for a reasonable length of time, and Defendant had reasonable grounds for believing that Plaintiff was attempting to commit larceny of goods held for sale.

Facts
Plaintiff, a 70-year-old man, was shopping in Defendant store. Plaintiff wore an ascot he had previously purchased in another department store. While trying on a sports coat, Plaintiff took off his ascot and put it in his pocket. Plaintiff purchased the sports coat. As Plaintiff was leaving the store, he took his ascot out of his pocket and put it on again. Goss, an employee of Defendant, “loomed up” in front of Plaintiff and demanded that he stop and explain where he had gotten the ascot. Approximately eight to ten people were watching as Plaintiff agreed to return with Goss to the store. On the way up the stairs, Plaintiff experienced chest and back pains and had to stop several times. When they reached the second floor, the salesman who had sold Plaintiff the sports coat told Goss that the ascot was indeed Plaintiff’s. Plaintiff was so upset by the incident that he required the store nurse’s attention. Plaintiff was subsequently hospitalized and treated for myocardial infra

Issue
There are two issues in this case. The first issue addresses Plaintiff’s claim of false imprisonment. The second issue addresses Defendant’s privilege to imprison.

Held
Yes, Defendant falsely imprisoned Plaintiff. No, the imprisonment was not privileged. Judgment for Plaintiff affirmed.

Discussion
In this case, Plaintiff was imprisoned by a demonstration of physical power that could only be avoided by submission. Plaintiff was falsely imprisoned and Defendant was not privileged to detain Plaintiff. Defendant did not have any objective, reasonable grounds for believing that Plaintiff committed larceny. The court added that even if there were reasonable grounds to detain Plaintiff, the detainment was not executed in a reasonable manner. In its analysis, the court pays special attention to Plaintiff’s age and physical condition.

