Citation
109 Minn. 456, 124 N.W. 221, 1910 Minn.

Brief Fact Summary
Lake Erie Transportation Co. (Defendant) tied and prudently held its steamship to Vincent’s (Plaintiff’s) dock during a severe storm. In doing so, Defendant preserved its steamship at the expense of Plaintiff’s dock. Plaintiff seeks compensation for the damage done to the dock and Defendant claims the privilege of private necessity.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A party acting under private necessity is liable for damages incurred to the property of others.

Facts
Defendant tied their steamship to a dock owned by Plaintiff. The steamship was at the Plaintiff’s dock to unload cargo. While the cargo was being unloaded, a storm started to build. After the cargo had been unloaded, the storm became so violent that navigation was practically suspended. Defendant signaled for a tug to tow the steamship from the dock but no tug was available because of the storm. The Defendant’s steamship remained tied to Plaintiff’s dock. If the steamship had been untied, it would have drifted to sea. The storm threw the steamship into Plaintiff’s dock causing damage to the dock. The jury awarded Plaintiff $500 for the damage done to the dock. Defendant appealed.

Issue
Is Defendant, acting under the privilege of private necessity, liable for damages incurred to Plaintiff’s property?

Held
Yes. Order affirmed.

Dissent
(J. Lewis) The majority opinion assumes that Defendant’s steamship was lawfully tied to Plaintiff’s dock. If the steamship was lawfully tied to the dock at the time of the storm, and Defendant could not, in the exercise of due care, have left the dock without subjecting his vessel to the hazards of the storm, then the damage to the dock was the result of an inevitable accident. If Plaintiff constructed a dock to a navigable line of waters and entered into contractual relations with Defendant, then Plaintiff takes the risk of damage to his dock by a boat caught there by a storm.

Discussion
This case represents a “conditional” or “incomplete” privilege. Here, Defendant may use Plaintiff’s dock because of the emergency situation, but he could only do so when it is a necessity. Defendant must pay for the privilege with reasonable rental value or compensation for lost or damaged property.

