Citation
86 Wis. 278, 56 N.W. 480 (1893)

Brief Fact Summary
Putney (Defendant) slightly, but unlawfully, kicked Vosburg (Plaintiff) during school. Defendant did not intent to do any harm to Plaintiff. Although the kick was slight, Plaintiff lost the use of his limb because Defendant’s kick revivified a previous injury.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
In actions for assault and battery, Plaintiff must show either that the intention was unlawful, or that Defendant is at fault. The wrongdoer is liable for all injuries resulting directly from the wrongful act whether they could or could not have been foreseen by him.

Facts
Plaintiff brought an action against Defendant to recover damages for assault and battery. Both Plaintiff (14-years old) and Defendant (11-years old) are students. Plaintiff and Defendant were sitting opposite each other across an aisle in school. Defendant reached across the aisle and slightly kicked Plaintiff in the shin. At first Plaintiff did not feel it. However, a few minutes later, Plaintiff felt a violent pain and cried out loudly. A few days before this incident, Plaintiff had hurt the same spot on his leg. Plaintiff’s) leg was in the process of healing. The theory of at least one of the medical witnesses was that Defendant’s kick revivified the microbes, causing bone destruction. Medical testimony agreed that Defendant’s slight kick was the exciting cause of the injury to P. P lost the use of his limb. The jury rendered a verdict for Plaintiff in the amount of $2,800. The case was again tried in the circuit court, and the trial resulted in a verdict for Plaintiff in t

Issue
There are 2 separate issues in this case. The first issue deals with intent. The second issue addresses damages.

Held
No, in actions for assault and battery, Plaintiff must show either that the intention was unlawful, or that Defendant is at fault. Yes, the wrongdoer is liable for all injuries resulting directly from the wrongful act whether they could or could not have been foreseen by him. Judgment reversed and case remanded for a new trial.

Discussion
Because Defendant kicked Plaintiff in school when it was inappropriate, the court held it was unlawful and that unlawfulness was enough to impose liability on Defendant. A defendant takes a plaintiff as he finds him.

