Citation
Mo. Ct. App., 244 S.W.3d 209 (2008)

Brief Fact Summary
The refusal of Paragon Ventures, L.L.C and Hamilton (collectively, “Buyers (D)”) (D) to close an agreement t purchase real estate from Crabby Inc. (Seller) (P), led to the suit of breach of contract against the Buyers (D) (D) in which the Seller (P) prevailed but the Buyers (D) (D) alleged that the trial court had erred in calculating Seller’s (P) damages because a financing contingency provision in the agreement had not been waived.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
(1) A condition in a real estate contract is waived when the buyer clearly, unequivocally and decisively shows his/her intentional relinquishment of the benefit of the condition.

Facts
A restaurant and the land on which it was, was put up for sale by Crabby’s Inc. (Seller) (P) while Hamilton and Paragon Ventures, L.L.C. (collectively, Buyers (D)) (D) agreed to buy the property at a cost of $290,000. Included in the contract was a financing contingency provision that made it contingent on “Buyer’s [sic] ability to obtain a conventional loan or loans in the amount of $232,000, redeemable over a period of not less than 15 years and bearing interest at a rate of not more than 5.5% per annum”.

Issue
(1) Is a condition in a real estate contract waived when the buyer clearly, unequivocally and decisively show his/her intentional relinquishment of the benefit of the condition?

Held
(Lynch, C.J) (1) Yes. A condition in a real estate contract is waived when the buyer clearly, unequivocally and decisively shows his/her intentional relinquishment of the benefit of the condition. The conduct of the Buyers (D) manifested a clear, unequivocal and decisive intentional relinquishment of the condition’s benefits to them and these are consistent with the intention to waive that contingency that no other reasonable explanation is possible. The court affirmed as to this issue.

Discussion
The conditions associated with real estates are meant to protect the buyer. They are not a condition of the seller’s duty under the contract but they are for the buyer. Hence, in this case, it can be concluded that seller had no affirmative duties under the financing contingency.

