Citation
325 F.3d 1188 (10th Cir. 2003)

Brief Fact Summary
Maness (P) who had sold his business to SKM, LLC (D) and its owners (D) brought suit against SKM (D) and the owners for breaching the three year agreement for employment he had with them before the end of the specified year. This allegation was argued against by SKM (D) and the owners (D) on the ground that Maness (P) employment was terminated on just grounds and that he was not entitled to damages because he did not make any effort to reduce his damages by seeking comparable employment elsewhere, notwithstanding that a non-competition agreement prevented him from doing so.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
(1) where an employee is actively hindered by the employer from discharging his/her duties; the termination of such an employee, employed under an employment agreement for a specified period of time is of no effect.

Facts
Maness (P) sold his business to SKM, LLC (D) which was co-owned by Mike Smith (D), his son Josh Smith (D) and Collins (D). This sale was made through an asset purchase agreement. The agreement stipulated that Maness (P) would remain in the employment of the company for three years as a production manager and he would also be entitled to annual salary. Also stipulated in the agreement was the provision which stated that Maness (P) was prohibited from competing directly or indirectly with SKM (D) throughout the United States for five years.

Issue
(1) where an employee is actively hindered by the employer from discharging his/her duties; does the termination of such an employee employed under an employment agreement for a specified period of time have any effect?

Held
(Kirby, J.) (1) No. where an employee is actively hindered by the employer from discharging his/her duties; the termination of such an employee, employed under an employment agreement for a specified period of time is of no effect. The trial court did not err in its findings that Maness (P) was prevented from discharging his duties by Josh Smith (D). Hence, SKM (D) and the owners (D) breached the asset purchase agreement under which the plaintiff is entitled to recover because they did not have cause to terminate his employment. The court affirmed as to this issue.

Discussion
The position taken by the court in this case illustrates the general principle that a breaching employer has the burden of proving the availability of substantially equivalent employment as part of its mitigation of damage defense. The employer is relieved of this burden if it can be proved that the employee has not made any reasonable efforts to obtain such work. Due to the fact that the defendants were not able to prove that a substantially equivalent employment was available for Maness (P), the trial court erred in its ruling that Maness’s (P) alleged failure to mitigate precluded him from any award of damages at all, as it had no evidence of how much to reduce his recovery by.

