Citation
454 F. Supp. 652, 1978 U.S. Dist. 16906

Brief Fact Summary
Delores Kedra, her eight children and a son-in-law (Plaintiffs), brought an action against the City of Philadelphia (Defendant), alleging that the Defendant committed a systematic pattern of harassment against their family over a fifteen-month period.  Defendant claims improper joinder of parties, because the events did not occur over a span of fifteen months.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Claims that occur over a lengthy period of time may be reasonably related and thus arise out of same transaction or occurrence.

Facts
Plaintiffs’ complaint alleges that two of the Kedra children and the husband of another were arrested on December 22, 1975, without probable cause, beaten, and interrogated at the police station.  Seven days later, police officers conducted an unlawful search of the Plaintiffs’ home, unlawfully detained members of the family and took some members to the station where they were beaten.  It is further alleged that police engaged in a systematic pattern of harassment of Plaintiffs.  One son was arresting and beaten in June, 1976, and another son was harassed by police in February or March, 1977.  Plaintiffs jointly filed suit under civil rights statutes, 42 U.S.C. Section:Section: 1983, 1985, 1986, for deprivation of constitutional rights and sought compensatory and punitive damages.  Defendants argued improper joinder of parties, because Plaintiffs’ claims against them did not arise out of the same transaction or occurrence.  The claims stemmed from events spanning fifteen months.

Issue
Was the joinder of the Defendants procedurally proper?

Held
Yes, joinder of Defendants was proper.  On the second issue, the district court decided that it should be determined after discovery has been completed and the case is ready for trial.

Discussion
Some of the benefits of a single trial are that it is more convenient and less expensive and time-consuming for the parties and the court.

