Citation
22 Ill.110 Misc. 2d 823, 442 N.Y.S.2d 957 (Sup. Ct. 1981)

Brief Fact Summary
Plaintiff Sheridan Suzuki sold a motorcycle to Ronald Bouton, who paid with a bad check and then sold the vehicle to Defendant Caruso Auto Sales the following day.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The common law rule that a thief could never pass good title has been supplanted by the statutory rule that a person receiving goods incident to a transaction involving a dishonored check receives only voidable title. A bona fide purchaser for value can receive good title from a person with voidable title so long as other statutory requirements are met.

Facts
Bouton purchased a motorcycle from Plaintiff for a sum of $3,559.44, which was paid for with a check later dishonored. Bouton received a bill of sale and registration in his name. Also, a Certificate of Title was applied for from the state agency pursuant to the state requirements. The process of granting a Certificate of Title was later interrupted by Plaintiff upon discovery that Bouton’s check was bad. One day later Bouton endeavored to sell the motorcycle to Defendant. During this time Defendant called Plaintiff and was told of the circumstances of the prior day’s transaction, although at that time the Plaintiff was unaware that Bouton’s check was no good. Bouton was paid $2,000 for the motorcycle by Defendant and promised to deliver the Certificate of Title to Defendant when it was received from the state. Bouton left the area and when the check was found to be bad, Plaintiff sued for return of the motorcycle and prevailed in a preliminary order to have the motorcycle pla

Issue
Did Bouton possess any title that could be passed on to Defendant in a manner which creates legal protection for Defendant as a bona fide purchaser?

Held
No. Plaintiff’s motion for summary judgment is granted and Defendant’s motion for summary judgment is denied.

Discussion
This case contrasts the common law rule that a thief’s title in stolen property is void with the U.C.C. rule that title is voidable when property is obtained with a bad

