Citation
909 F.2d 1150, 1990 U.S. App.

Brief Fact Summary
Linegar was shot and killed while wearing a bulletproof vest manufactured by Armour of America (Defendant). The bullets shot from the gun, struck Plaintiff in parts of the body not covered by the vest.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The article sold must be dangerous to an extent beyond that, which would be contemplated by the ordinary consumer who purchases it, and who has the ordinary knowledge common of the community as to its characteristics.

Facts
Linegar was on a routine traffic stop, when David Tate shot and killed him. Plaintiff was wearing a bulletproof vest designed and manufactured by Defendant and purchased by the highway patrol. None of the shots that hit the vest penetrated the vest or caused Linegar injury. Plaintiff’s death resulted from gunshots that struck parts of his body not protected by the vest. Defendant’s vest did not meet at the side of Linegar’s body, leaving an area along the side of his body exposed. The bullet that proved fatal to Linegar, entered his body from the opening described. Linegar’s widow and children (Plaintiffs) sued under products liability. The jury returned a verdict for Plaintiffs. Defendant appealed.

Issue
Is Defendant liable to Plaintiffs for an obvious feature on a bulletproof vest manufactured by Defendant and worn by Plaintiff?

Held
No. Judgment reversed.

Discussion
This case sets out the elements of defective design and focuses in on the requirement of “unreasonably dangerous.” In this case, the court held that the vest was not unreasonably dangerous because it did everything that would be reasonably expected of it. The court did not want to impose standards or guidelines in designing bulletproof vests, because manufactures are supposed to give consumers choices and trade-offs. The vest in this case, was more flexible and allowed for better heat dissipation than a full vest. A less protective but more mobile vest was not, as a matter of law, unreasonably dangerous.

