Citation
363 U.S. 278

Brief Fact Summary
Taxpayer Duberstein received a Cadillac from a long-time business acquaintance.  At issue was whether the Cadillac was truly a gift or a payment in exchange for business information.   Taxpayer Stanton received a large amount of money as a gratuity after he resigned his employment of 10 years with a church.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The value of property acquired by gift is excluded from gross income.

Facts
Duberstein, Taxpayer, was president of the Duberstein Iron & Metal Company.  He did business with Mohawk Metal Corporation.  Berman was the president of Mohawk and the two knew each other for seven years.  Taxpayer often provided Berman with information on potential customers.  Berman gave Taxpayer a Cadillac in exchange for the information.  Taxpayer did not want to accept the car because he had no expectation for giving the information to Berman., but upon Berman’s insistence he accepted the car.  Taxpayer testified that he did not think Berman would have sent him the Cadillac except for the customer information.  Mohawk deducted the Cadillac as a business expense on its corporate income tax return.  Taxpayer did not include the value of the Cadillac in his gross income for 1951.  The Commissioner of Internal Revenue asserted a deficiency and the Tax Court affirmed.

Issue
Was the Cadillac a gift excludable from gross income?

Held
Justice Brennan issued the opinion for the Supreme Court of the United States in holding that in Duberstein it was not error to consider the Cadillac as income and not a gift.

Dissent
Opinions of Justices Harlan, Whittaker, Douglass, and Black are omitted from the text.

Concurrence
Justice Frankfurter concurred in the judgment in Duberstein.

Discussion
The Supreme Court determined that the courts must take into consideration the intention of the one transferring the property.  Ultimately, whether or not an item is a gift is a question of fact for the trier of fact.  Further, appellate courts should not overturn a trier of fact’s determination unless it is clearly erroneous.

