Citation
291 N.W.2d 686,1980 Minn.

Brief Fact Summary
After a brief consultation in his office regarding a potential medical malpractice action, Defendant told Plaintiff that she probably didn’t have a case, and she acted in reliance on this information. By the time that she learned that her case was

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Negligence and legal malpractice. Malpractice consists of (1) an existing attorney-client relationship, (2) in which the attorney acted negligently, (3) in such a way as to be the proximate cause of the client’s damages, (4) and but for the attorney’s acts the claim would have been successful.

Facts
Plaintiff, Joan Togstad, is brought suit against Defendant, attorney Jerre Miller, for his alleged negligence in the course of a preliminary consultation with her. After she had fully described the conditions leading to a serious accident suffered by her husband while undergoing treatment in a local hospital, Defendant told her that it was his opinion that she probably didn’t have a case, but that he would consult with his partner and get back to her. Since he never followed up with her, she assumed that his initial assessment was correct and did not bring suit in reliance on this opinion. She did not consult with another attorney until one year after her discussion with Defendant, at which time the statute had run and her potential claim was barred. Plaintiff was awarded nearly $650,000, and Defendant now challenges this award.

Issue
Did Miller commit malpractice under these facts?

Held
Yes. An attorney-client relationship was formed under these facts, and Defendant acted negligently in assessing the merits of Plaintiff’s case.  He had reason to know that his advice could injure Plaintiff if negligently given, and had a duty to further investigate the case before indicating that she did not having a valid claim.

Discussion
Note that an attorney-client relationship was immediately created when Plaintiff entered Defendant’s office seeking his opinion, despite the fact that she never formally retained him to represent her. This is a very unfortunate holding for the attorney here, but it underscores how seriously lawyers should consider their opinions before dispensing them-even to non-clien

