Citation
22 Ill.45 Del. 394, 6 Terry 394, 75 A.2d 222 (Super. Ct. 1950)

Brief Fact Summary
The Plaintiff received certain real estate pursuant to a will of one Benjamin Potter, which was granted in fee simple but in case Plaintiff died without leaving lawful issue of her body then the estate was to be given over to the children of one William Potter in fee simple.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The Plaintiff became seized of a estate tail in the provisions of the will, which by statute can be defeated where, as here, the Plaintiff conveyed by deed a fee simple interest to Defendant.

Facts
Benjamin Potter, deceased, by his will devised certain real estate to his wife, and upon her death, devised “all the same over to my granddaughter, Anna Naomi Coverdale (now Caccamo), in fee simple and absolutely forever; but in case the said Anna Naomi Coverdale should die without leaving lawful issue of her body begotten then and in that case I give, devise and bequeath all the same over unto” the children of William B. Potter in fee simple. Anna Naomi Coverdale, now married to Caccamo, purported to bar the estate tail devised to her in the will by use of a statute which provided that an ordinary deed purporting to convey a fee simple absolute “shall have the same effect and operation for barring all estates tail” as a common recovery (a type of common law suit). Then, on April 29, 1950, Plaintiff Caccamo sold the lands in question at public auction to Defendant Delema Banning, for the high bid of $2,025, of which Defendant paid to Plaintiff $405 and agreed to pay the balanc

Issue
Did the Plaintiff have a fee tail in the lands under the devise in the will, and if so, did she properly bar the estate tail under the statute such that the tail is barred and the Plaintiff may convey the lands in fee simple with marketable title?

Held
Yes. Judgment for Plaintiff for $1,620 plus costs.

Discussion
Note that the effect of the statute is to provide protection to the buyer of property. Suppose the Court held that the estate tail was not defeated: in that case the Plaintiff could die many years after the 1950 sale and Defendant could be divested of her interest by the children of Potter. The result of the case is to favor certainty in land transact

