Citation
22 Ill.46 Wn. App. 1, 728 P.2d 1091 (Ct. App. 1986)

Brief Fact Summary
The C.B. Dodge Company, by quitclaim deed in 1908, conveyed to the City of Seattle a narrow strip of land which bordered Lake Washington, so that the city could construct what is now Lake Washington Boulevard. The deed was subject to a condition that the grantor retained, for its successors and assigns, the right to build and maintain a boathouse along the shore of Lake Washington, which the city was responsible for acquiring the land for the boathouse and allowing the building and use of the boathouse.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The City of Seattle took title to the property in fee simple subject to a condition subsequent, and the denial of the successor’s right to property upon which to build a boathouse constituted an unconstitutional taking without compensation by inverse condemnation.

Facts
The C.B. Dodge Company, by quitclaim deed in 1908, conveyed to the City of Seattle a narrow strip of land which bordered Lake Washington, so that the city could construct what is now Lake Washington Boulevard. The deed was subject to a condition that the grantor retained, for its successors and assigns, the right to build and maintain a boathouse along the shore of Lake Washington, which the city was responsible for acquiring the land for the boathouse and allowing the building and use of the boathouse. Between the years of 1908 and 1983 neither C.B. Dodge nor any successors had asked the city to allow them to construct a boathouse on city land. The Court found that the evidence supported a conclusion of fact that no such boathouse was ever constructed. In 1983 the Martins and two other successors made a demand of the city for the land upon which to construct a boathouse, which the city refused. Thereafter, the Plaintiffs brought suit to exercise their right to forfeit the cit

Issue
Are the provisions in the 1908 deed legally sufficient to vest in the successors of the grantor rights which may not be unilaterally denied by the grantee?

Held
Yes. The city cannot prohibit the Plaintiffs from building a boathouse without paying just compensation, and the denial of that right is an unconstitutional taking by inverse condemnation. The Plaintiffs are awarded $60,000 as damages and the case is remanded to the trial court for a determination of attorneys fees and expert witness fees.

Discussion
This is an example of the court giving credence to the “magic words” of successors and assigns in the 1908 deed. One should consider if the intent of the City of Seattle was to be forever liable to allow the successors and assigns of the C.B. Dodge Company the right to build a boathouse on city land. This is an example of strict construction of terms within a deed.

