Citation
22 Ill.26 N.J. 246, 139 A.2d 291 (1958)

Brief Fact Summary
A municipality, Ocean City, owned many undeveloped lots in a swampy condition, which were advertised for sale. The sale of the lots to Defendant Stoeco Homes was subject to a condition that they fill and grade the undeveloped lots within one year or, according to the original deed, the lands would automatically revert back to the municipality.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
When determining the nature of a defeasible interest in land, which in this case is between a fee simple determinable with right of reverter or a fee simple subject to a condition precedent, created by deed the court will seek to read the whole deed to determine the intent of the parties.

Facts
In 1951 Ocean City held title to a large number of undeveloped lots situated in a swamp, and divisible into two segments one being the eastern side of Bay Avenue and the other being the western side of Bay Avenue. In 1951 both of the tracts of land were advertised for public sale to the highest bidder, except for 226 lots of which the city wished to remain owners, and that certain terms and conditions incident to the sale were set forth. The only bidder was Defendant Stoeco Homes, and the winning bids were $10,525 for the eastern lots and $100,000 for the western lots. The sales were confirmed by municipal resolution on February 16, 1951, and the final settlement was made on June 29, 1951. The deed contained provisions that are in dispute herein. Specifically, the deed called for all the lots, inclusive of those retained by the city, to be graded and filled to the existing levels established for the city and that such filling was to be done within one year of the deed. The cit

Issue
Did the deed from the city to the Defendant create an estate in fee simple subject to a condition subsequent or a fee simple determinable?

Held
The estate was a fee simple subject to a condition subsequent. Affirmed.

Discussion
Consider the effect of the Court’s decision. The Defendant is afforded protection against the taxpayer suit. The city, if it desires to regain the property, must file its own suit, to which the Defendant would have certain defenses available (waiver and estoppel). This case is based on a distinction between the way in which the remedy for a happening of an event in a deed is to be recovered. On the one hand the remedy is automatic and inflexible and on the other hand the remedy is subject to legal action and provides rights to the Defendant.

