Citation
251 Ga. 291, 305 S.E.2d 82, 1983 Ga. 754.

Brief Fact Summary
The Defendant, Kilgore (Defendant), was convicted for the murder of Roger Norman (Mr. Norman) and was given a life sentence. He appealed to the Supreme Court of Georgia.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
It is possible for various persons to be parties to a single agreement and thus one conspiracy, even though they do not know the identity of one another and even though they are not all aware of the details of the plan of operation. However, there has to be limits on the concept that persons who do not know each other can agree to commit a crime.

Facts
In the early morning of July 8, 1981, the victim, Mr. Norman, was traveling south on Interstate 59 to his home in Alabama. While driving he was shot in the head and killed. At trial, the state introduced evidence of a conspiracy to kill Mr. Norman. In particular, the state introduced evidence of three different attempts on Mr. Norman’s life. For the first attempt, David Oldaker (Oldaker) testified that on February 6, 1981, Greg Benton (Benton) asked Oldaker to travel to Mr. Norman’s home to kill him. Benton told Oldaker that he was hired by a man name Tom who lived in Soddy-Daisy Tennessee and sold pharmaceuticals. Oldaker and Benton were unsuccessful in their attempt to kill Norman. As to the second attempt, Ed Williams (Williams), an employee of a truck stop located off the interstate testified that on the evening of June 8, 1981, he witnessed two cars traveling close together over a bridge on the interstate. Williams testified that he heard sounds like a car backfiring and

Issue
Whether the Defendant, who did not know if or communicate with Oldaker and Benton, can be considered to have agreed to and become co-conspirators in the murder of Mr. Norman?

Held
The court found that the Defendant, Oldaker and Benton were not co-conspirators and as a result, it was an error to admit the hearsay testimony of Oldaker.

Discussion
The court focused on the differences between a “chain” conspiracy and a “wheel” conspiracy, which was the type at issue in the case before the court.

