Citation
428 U.S. 153, 96 S. Ct. 2909, 49 L. Ed. 2d 859, 1976 U.S. 82.

Brief Fact Summary
The Defendant, alternatively referred to as “the petitioner” in the United States Supreme Court opinion by virtue of being the party “petitioning” or asking the Supreme Court for review of the decision, was convicted of murder with intent and armed robbery. He was thereafter sentenced to death.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The death penalty is constitutional.

Facts
The Defendant was convicted of murder with intent and armed robbery. After a post-conviction sentencing hearing, the jury found beyond a reasonable doubt that the Defendant was guilty of two statutory aggravating circumstances and sentenced the Defendant to death.

Issue
Does the imposition of the death penalty violate the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution (Constitution)?

Held
No.

Dissent
Justice Brennan dissents: Our society has progressed to a point where the imposition of the death penalty is cruel and unusual under any circumstances.

Concurrence
Justice White, with whom the Chief Justice and Justice Rehnquist joins, adds that the Defendant’s argument that there is an unconstitutional amount of discretion in the system that separates those suspects who receive the death penalty from those who receive life imprisonment, a lesser penalty, or are acquitted or never charged is absurd. Such an argument serves as an indictment of the whole legal system. The Defendant essentially states that humans are incompetent to run the system. Justice White refuses to interfere with the system on such grounds.

Discussion
A sentence of death is constitutional, but is an “extreme sanction” to be used as a penalty for only the most extreme crimes. The imposition of death for the crime of murder is not excessive or disproportionate to the crime committed. As long as the sentencing procedures providing for the penalty are not likely to be imposed in an arbitrary and capricious manner, the sentence is constitutional.

