Citation
515 U.S. 389, 115 S. Ct. 2199, 132 L. Ed. 2d 351 (1995)

Brief Fact Summary
A conspiracy to import drugs into the United States was foiled because one of the participants was a Drug Enforcement Agent.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
“[W]here the legislature has authorized such a particular punishment range for a given crime, the resulting sentence within that range constitutes punishment only for the offense of conviction for purposes of the double jeopardy inquiry.”

Facts
In June 1990, various individuals, including the Petitioner, Steven Kurt Witte (the “Petitioner”), arranged to import a substantial amount of marijuana (4400 pounds)  and cocaine with an undercover Drug Enforcement Agency agent named Roger Norman (”Norman”).  Various members of the conspiracy were arrested on August 12 of the same year, when Norman alerted local Mexican authorities, but the Petitioner was not one of those arrested.  In January 1991, Norman solicited the Petitioner to partake in another drug deal.  The Petitioner agreed to purchase 1,000 pounds of marijuana from Norman and agreed to provide a $50,000 down payment.  The marijuana was to be transported in a horse trailer the Petitioner purchased for the original August transaction.  On February 7, 1991, the Petitioner, Norman and an individual named Kelly met in Houston.  After the transaction, the Petitioner and Kelly were arrested.

Issue
“[W]hether a court violates [the Eighth Amendment] by convicting and sentencing a defendant for a crime when the conduct underlying that offense has been considered in determining the defendant’s sentence for a previous conviction[?]”

Held
The majority observed, “Petitioner clearly was neither prosecuted for nor convicted of the cocaine offenses during the first criminal proceeding. The offense to which petitioner pleaded guilty and for which he was sentenced in 1992 was attempted possession of marijuana with intent to distribute it, whereas the crimes charged in the instant indictment are conspiracy to import cocaine and attempted importation of the same.”  To the contrary, “the indictment in this case did not charge the same offense to which petitioner formerly had pleaded guilty.”

