Citation
22 Ill.333 U.S. 591, 68 S. Ct. 715, 92 L. Ed. 898, 77 U.S.P.Q. 29 (1948)

Brief Fact Summary
The Taxpayer, Sunnen (Taxpayer), licensed a corporation to use his patents and assigned the royalties to his wife. The wife paid the taxes on the royalties, but the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) asserted the royalties were taxable to the Taxpayer. Because a prior case had litigated this issue, the Court in the second action invoked collateral estoppel as to the particular issue.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Where two cases involve income taxes in different taxable years, collateral estoppel must be confined to situations where the matter raised in the second suit is identical in all respects with that decided in the first proceeding and where the controlling facts and applicable legal rules remain unchanged.

Facts
The Taxpayer issued a license on his patents to a corporation, which, in turn gave him a 10% royalty on the licenses. The Taxpayer assigned his right to the royalties to his wife without consideration. She paid the taxes on the royalties as part of her income, but the Taxpayer did not include the royalties on his taxes. The IRS contended that the royalty amounts were taxable to the Taxpayer. The Tax Court held that the royalties from 1937- 1941 were taxable to the Taxpayer except for the royalties paid in the amount of $4,881.35 in 1937 under the 1928 agreement. The Court reached this conclusion because in a prior 1935 proceeding, by the Board of Tax Appeals (the Board) for Taxpayer’s tax liability for 1929 – 1931, the Board held the Taxpayer was not taxable for royalties paid to his wife under the 1928 licensing agreement. The Tax Court held that res judicata barred the court from hearing the claim on the royalties paid in 1937 under that agreement.  The Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the Tax Court’s holding of res judicata as to payment of 1937 royalties under the 1928 agreement. The Appeals Court reversed the part that held the Taxpayer liable for the royalty amount paid to his wife from 1937-1941.

Issue
Whether the Appeal Court’s decision regarding collateral estoppel preclusion as to the royalties paid under the 1928 agreement was erroneous.

Held
Yes. Collateral Estoppel relieves the government and taxpayer of redundant litigation of the identical question of the statute’s application to the taxpayer’s status. The royalty payments not involved in the earlier action by the Board of Tax Appeals. This action concerned different tax years and were not collaterally estopped. However, because legal principles developed in various intervening decisions of the United States Supreme Court (Supreme Court) made clear that the Board erred in its ruling, collateral   estoppel does not apply to the issue of the royalties paid from the 1928 agreement. Reversed and remanded.

Discussion
Res judicata and collateral estoppel apply in the federal income tax field. Income taxes are collected annually. Each year begins new liability and new causes of action. If a claim of liability or non-liability relating to a particular year is litigated, a judgment on the merits is precluded by res judicata as to any subsequent proceeding involving the same claim and the same tax year. However, if the subsequent proceeding is concerned with a similar or unlike claim relating to a different tax year, the prior judgment is collateral estoppel and precludes issues in the second case that were litigated and judged upon in the first.  The Supreme Court noted that because the legal principles shed light on the fact that the Board had not reached its decision properly, the facts surrounding the issues in the second proceeding differed from the facts in the first enough to warrant a second look at the issue, thereby not invoking collateral estoppel.

