Citation
367 U.S. 643, 81 S. Ct. 1684, 6 L. Ed. 2d 1081 (1961)<br />

Brief Fact Summary
Police officers sought a bombing suspect and evidence of the bombing at the petitioner, Miss Mapp’s (the “petitioner”) house.  After failing to gain entry on an initial visit, the officers returned with what purported to be a search warrant, forcibly entered the residence, and conducted a search in which obscene materials were discovered.  The petitioner was tried and convicted for these materials.

Issue
May a government official make an arrest without a warrant where a felony has been committed in the official’s presence?

Synopsis of Rule of Law
All evidence discovered as a result of a search and seizure conducted in violation of the Fourth Amendment of the United States Constitution (”Constitution”) shall be inadmissible in State court proceedings.

Facts
Three Cleveland police officers arrived at the petitioner’s residence pursuant to information that a bombing suspect was hiding out there and that paraphernalia regarding the bombing was hidden there.  The officers knocked and asked to enter, but the petitioner refused to admit them without a search warrant after speaking with her attorney.  The officers left and returned approximately three hours later with what purported to be a search warrant.  When the petitioner failed to answer the door, the officers forcibly entered the residence.  The petitioner’s attorney arrived and was not permitted to see the petitioner or to enter the residence.  The petitioner demanded to see the search warrant and when presented, she grabbed it and placed it in her shirt.  Police struggled with the petitioner and eventually recovered the warrant.  The petitioner was then placed under arrest for being belligerent and taken to her bedroom on the second floor of the residence.  The officers then co

Held
A government official may arrest a person without a warrant upon probable cause to believe the person is guilty of a felony.

Issue
Whether evidence discovered during a search and seizure conducted in violation of the Fourth Amendment of the Constitution shall be admissible in a State court?

