Citation
22 Ill.414 F.2d 143 (6th Cir. 1969)

Brief Fact Summary
Plaintiff sued many Defendants for breach of contract arising from Defendants’ alleged failure to pay for supplies delivered by Plaintiff on a construction job. Defendants filed counterclaims, cross-claims and third party complaints against each other in tort and on different contracts regarding responsibility for delivering the supplies. The District Court dismissed the cross-claims and Defendants appealed.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Cross-claims are permitted to be filed against co-defendants under Rule 13(g) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure if the claims arise from the same “transaction or occurrence” of the initial claim. If the claims are centered on the same legal issue involved in the initial claim, this is considered the same “transaction or occurrence.”

Facts
Southern Builders (Defendant; “Southern”), a Tennessee corporation, was a general contractor and was hired by Memphis, Tennessee (Defendant) and secured a bond with Continental Casualty (Defendant; “Continental”) to build a new city hall. Southern subcontracted with Alexander Marble and Tile Co. (Defendant; “Alexander”), a partnership of Tennessee residents, and Marble International, Inc. (Defendant; “Marble”), a Texas corporation, to install marble in the new city hall. Alexander hired Plaintiff Lasa Per L’Industria Del Marmo Societa Per Azioni (”Lasa”), an Italian corporation, to supply materials.

Issue
Could Defendants file cross claims against each other under Rule 13(g) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure as claims based on the same “transaction or occurrence” when the claims are founded on the facts occurring in the initial lawsuit but involving different contracts?

Held
Yes. Reversed and remanded.

Dissent
Plaintiff’s suit is in contract and all of Alexander and Southern’s claims are in tort. The claims involve separate legal issues and therefore, the cross claims should not be permitted in the same case. In addition, even the two contract actions should not be in the same case because they involve different contracts, which would give rise to different factual issues.

Discussion
This case illustrates that complexity of parties, pleadings and issues are not grounds to dismiss cross claims. In the event that various claims center on one factual situation, this satisfies the requirements under Rule 13 (g) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.

