Citation
311 U.S. 32, 61 S. Ct. 115, 85 L. Ed. 22, 1940 U.S. 108

Brief Fact Summary
The Hansberrys (Defendants), a black family, bought a house in an area of Chicago allegedly covered by a racially restrictive covenant. Lee (Plaintiff) brought an action in Illinois state court to enjoin breach of the covenant, naming as defendants both the Defendant’s, and the people from whom the Defendant’s had bought the property. Plaintiff sought the use of an earlier class action judgment regarding the covenant to prevent the Hansberry’s from litigating the issue of whether the covenant was valid.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A judgment rendered in a class suit is res judicata as to members of the class who are not formal parties to the suit; however, a selection of representatives for purposes of litigation, whose substantial interests are not necessarily or even probably the same as those whom they are deemed to represent does not afford that protection to absent parties which due process requires.

Facts
Defendants, a black family, bought a house in an area of Chicago allegedly covered by a racially restrictive covenant. Plaintiff brought an action in Illinois state court to enjoin breach of the covenant, naming as defendants both the Defendant’s, and the people from whom the Defendant’s had bought the property.

Issue
Whether a state court has deprived Petitioners of the due process of law guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment by its adjudication that Petitioners are bound by an earlier judgment to which they were not parties.

Held
Yes. The Supreme Court of the United States reversed the decision of the Illinois Supreme Court.

Discussion
In assessing any complaint involving due process, the inquiry necessarily deals with notice and opportunity to be heard. One way of looking at this case is to say that one must have been a member of the class of plaintiffs at the time the original litigation was been filed in order to receive substantial notice and the opportunity to have been heard at the time the original judgment was issued.

