Citation
22 Ill.431 U.S. 494, 97 S. Ct. 1932, 52 L. Ed. 2d 531 (1977)

Brief Fact Summary
The City of East Cleveland adopted a housing ordinance, which limited the occupancy of a dwelling unit to a single family. The ordinance had an unusual definition of a family, which recognized only a few categories of related individuals.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
When the government intrudes on choices concerning family living arrangements, the court will examine carefully the importance of the governmental interests advanced and the extent to which they are served by the challenged regulation.

Facts
The City of East Cleveland adopted a housing ordinance, which limited the occupancy of a dwelling unit to a single family. The ordinance had an unusual definition of what constituted a family, which recognized only a few categories of related individuals and had the effect of making it illegal for Moore (Appellant) to live with her grandsons where she lived with her son, his son, and another grandson. In 1973, Moore received a notice of violation from the City, stating that the grandson who was not her son’s son was an “illegal occupant” and directed Appellant to comply with the ordinance. The City then filed a criminal charge when Appellant refused to remove the grandson. Appellant was convicted and sentenced to five days in jail and a $25.00 fine. The Court of Appeals of Ohio affirmed after considering Appellant’s claims that the ordinance violated the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. The Supreme Court of Ohio denied review. The Supreme Court of the United Sta

Issue
Is the ordinance constitutional?

Held
No. Reversed.

Dissent
Freedom of association is not an applicable doctrine upon which to decide this case.

Discussion
This case is illustrative of the results of the rule set down in Belle Terre v. Borass, which gave such wide deference to the police power of the legislative function. The rule there upheld the constitutionality of an ordinance, which did not make any allowance for non-traditional family units.

