Citation
22 Ill.429 U.S. 252, 97 S. Ct. 555, 50 L. Ed. 2d 450 (1977)

Brief Fact Summary
The Metropolitan Housing Development Corporation (Respondent) applied to the Village of Arlington Heights (Petitioner) for rezoning of a 15 acre parcel from single-family residential to multi-family residential, intending to build federally subsidized low to moderate income housing. The request was denied and Respondent sued for injunctive and declaratory relief, claiming that the effect of the denial of rezoning was discriminatory in nature and thus violative of the Fourteenth Amendment and the Fair Housing Act of 1968, 42 U.S.C. Section:3601, et. seq.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Official action will not be held unconstitutional solely because it results in a racially disproportionate impact.

Facts
Respondent applied to Petitioner for rezoning of a 15 acre parcel from single-family residential to multi-family residential, intending to build federally subsidized low to moderate income housing. The request was denied and Respondent sued for injunctive and declaratory relief, claiming that the effect of the denial of rezoning was discriminatory in nature and thus violative of the Fourteenth Amendment and the Fair Housing Act of 1968, 42 U.S.C. Section:3601, et. seq. Arlington Heights is a suburb of Chicago, which is predominately white (the 1970 census showed that only 27 of the city’s 64,000 residents were black). The city is mostly zoned for single-family detached housing. The Clerics of St. Viator (the Order) owns an 80-acre parcel of land surrounded by single-family housing. In 1970, the Order decided to devote some of its land to low and moderate income housing, and found that the most expedient way to accomplish this goal was to work through a nonprofit developer experienced

Issue
Was the denial of the rezoning application unconstitutionally or statutorily discriminatory?

Held
The Court found that the Respondents failed to meet their burden of proving that discriminatory purpose was a motivating factor in the Petitioner’s decision, but the court of appeals did not decide whether the Respondent’s have stated a claim under the Fair Housing Act. Reversed and Remanded.

Discussion
In cases without some evidence of racially discriminatory intent, the mere fact that the decision of a governmental agency affects race will not be enough to show a violation of the Fourteenth Amendment’s Due Process Clause.

