Citation
135 Ill. App. 3d 936, 482 N.E.2d 418, 1985 Ill. App. 90 Ill. Dec. 599

Brief Fact Summary
Plaintiff, insured’s mother, appeals from a declaratory judgment wherein the trial court found there was sufficient evidence to conclude that the primary beneficiary under the insured’s life insurance policy, survived the insured, and therefore was entitled to the proceeds of the life insurance policy.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Survivorship is a fact that must be proven by a preponderance of the evidence by the party’s whose claim depends on survivorship.

Facts
On September 29, 1982, husband and wife, Stanley and Theresa Janus, decedents, unknowingly ingested cyanide-laced Tylenol capsules.  Shortly afterwards Stanley collapsed on the floor.  Theresa was still standing when a nurse came to the scene and began performing CPR on Stanley.  Minutes later, at approximately 5:45pm, paramedic Ronald Mahon arrived and saw Theresa faint and go into seizures.  She was breathing on her own but her pupils didn’t respond to light.  In a paramedic’s report Mahon wrote that at approximately 6:00pm Stanley had “zero blood pressure, zero pulse and zero respiration.”  Paramedic Robert Lockhart arrived at 5:55pm and both Stanley and Theresa were unconscious with non-reactive pupils.  Lockhart intubated both of them and in order to keep their air passages open.  Neither Stanley nor Theresa showed signs of being able to breathe on their own while being transported to the hospital.  However, Lockhart stated that when Theresa had a palpable pulse and blood

Issue
Whether the trial court’s finding that Theresa Janus survived Stanley Janus was against the manifest weight of the evidence?

Held
No.  Affirmed.

Discussion
In Illinois, if the title to property depends on the priority of death and there’s no sufficient evidence that the persons have died otherwise than simultaneously and there are no other provisions in testamentary or other governing instruments for distribution of the property, the property of each person shall be disposed of as if he had survived.

