Citation
116 Md. App. 468, 697 A.2d 113, 1997 Md. App.

Brief Fact Summary
Appellant appeals from a judgment wherein the court declined to allow a Medicaid recipient to rescind a disclaimer he made in respect to an inheritance he was to receive from his deceased sister’s estate.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Where a recipient renounces an inheritance that would cause him to be financially disqualified from receiving benefits, the renunciation should incur the same penalty of disqualification that acceptance would have brought about, and should render the recipient liable for any payments incorrectly paid by the state in consequence.

Facts
On February 4, 1992, Paul Lettich, appointed Richard Troy, appellant, as his attorney in fact and granted him power of attorney.  In April 1992 Lettich became a resident of the Cardinal Sheehan Center for the Aging, Stella Maris Hospice, and appellant applied for medical assistance on behalf of Lettich to be used when his resources became exhausted.  Around January 1, 1995, Lettich was deemed qualified to receive benefits and all medical expenses from then on were paid by Medicare and Medicaid.  On February 25, 1995, Lettich’s sister, Alta Mae Lettich died intestate and was survived by Lettich, and her two sisters, Mildred Hart and Gladys McGlaughlin.   Personal contact between Lettich and his sisters was minimal but appellant kept them abreast of Lettich’s status, including appellant’s legal relationship with Lettich.  Hart was appointed personal representative of Alta Mae’s estate and shortly after visited Lettich and assisted him in executing a disclaimer to his share of

Issue
Whether the court erred in holding that the Medicaid recipient could disclaim his inheritance?

Held
No.  Judgment affirmed.

Discussion
Medicaid is a means tested program wherein eligibility for Medicaid is dependent upon meeting various income and resource tests.  Once an individual begins receiving benefits, it is possible that his eligibility status might change due to changed financial circumstances.

