Citation
22 Ill.429 U.S. 190, 97 S. Ct. 451, 50 L. Ed. 2d 397 (1976)

Brief Fact Summary
Appellants, a male between the ages of 18-21 and a liquor vendor, challenged the order the United States District Court for the Western District of Oklahoma which dismissed their action challenging the constitutionality of an Oklahoma statute, which prohibited the sale of three and two-tenths percent beer (3.2% beer) to males under 21 years of age and females under the age of 18.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The Supreme Court ruled that classifications by gender in state statutes must “serve important governmental objectives and must be substantially related to achievement of those objectives.”

Facts
Oklahoma had a statute forbidding the sale of 3.2% beer to males under the age of 21 and females under the age of 18. Craig was between the ages of 18-21 and Whitener was a licensed vendor of 3.2% beer. Craig and Whitener brought an action against an Oklahoma official challenging the constitutionality of the statute.

Issue
Does an Oklahoma statute forbidding sale of 3.2% beer to males under the age of 21 and females under the age of 18 deny equal protection to males aged 18 to 20?

Held
Craig’s claim was rendered moot because he turned 21 during the action. Whitener, on the other hand, had a viable action as a licensed vendor of 3.2% beer, and could rely on an equal protection challenge. Whitener suffered “injury in fact” as the challenged statutory provisions are addressed to vendors like her who either must obey the statutory provisions and incur economic injury or disobey the statute and suffer sanctions. In such a situation, Whitener may resist efforts to restrict her operations as a vendor by advocating the rights of third parties seeking access to her liquor market.

Dissent
Justice William Rehnquist (J. Rehnquist) argued the Court should use a “mere rationality” standard as it had in past gender classification cases, instead of the more difficult “substantial relation” standard. He argued the drunk driving males should be viewed in proportion to drunk driving females. The statistics showing that more males drive drunk was sufficient evidence to demonstrate the statute promoted traffic safety.

Discussion
This case sets the standard the Supreme Court applies when reviewing a gender-based classification in a state statute.

