Citation
92 Ohio App. 3d 232, 634 N.E.2d 697, 1994 Ohio App.

Brief Fact Summary
Leichtman (Plaintiff) brought an action against defendants, WLW Jacor Communications, host, and smoker for battery, invasion of privacy, and a violation of a Cincinnati, Ohio ordinance, alleging that a radio station co-host repeatedly blew smoke in his face. The Hamilton County Court of Common Pleas (Ohio) dismissed his complaint. Plaintiff appealed

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The blowing of smoke on one’s person meets the requirements of a cause of action for battery because, however trivial the incident, when the elements of the cause of action are met (in this case battery, i.e., when the defendant acts intending to cause an offensive or harmful contact and an offensive or harmful contact actually results) the court must permit a cause of action.

Facts
The guest entered the radio studio to make a public radio appearance with the host. At the host’s urging, the smoker repeatedly blew cigar smoke in the guest’s face. The guest contended that his complaint was sufficient to sustain a claim of battery.

Issue
Does the blowing of smoke on one’s person constitute battery?

Held
The court held that no matter how trivial the incident, a battery was actionable, even where damages would be nominal. The court held also that the invasion of his privacy and violation of a local non-smoking regulation claims were not sufficient to withstand a motion to dismiss. The court further held that there existed no basis under common law for regulation creating rights for nonsmokers and that here was no implied private remedy for violation of the non-smoking regulation because sanctions were provided to enforce the regulation. The court held that the issue of liability pursuant to respondeat superior (whether the employee was acting within the scope of employment) was a question of fact. In sum: The court affirmed the dismissal of the invasion of privacy and violation of a local smoking regulation claims but reversed the dismissal of the battery claim. The case was thus remanded.

Discussion
Central to this case is the necessity of fulfilling the elements of battery and the definition of its various components, i.e., what constitutes intentionality, and harmful and offensive touching. First, an act may be deemed intentional where 1) the defendant intends to cause the consequences of his acts; or 2) where there exists substantial certainty that the tortuous conduct will result.

