Citation
999 P.2d 814

Brief Fact Summary
Shortly after having taken residence at Beatrice Hover Personal Care Center, an adult assisted living facility, eighty-three year-old Helen Everly (Defendant) struck Sherry Lynn Muniz (Plaintiff), a professional caregiver at the center. Plaintiff subsequently brought suit against Barbara White, Everly’s granddaughter, and Everly (Defendants). The jury found in Defendants’ favor having concluded that Everly lacked the requisite intent to sustain a cause of action. This case is a challenge to the decision of the Court of Appeals of Colorado, which determined that a mentally incapacitated adult should be held liable for her intentional tort even if she was unable to appreciate the wrongfulness of her actions.<span class="heading">Synopsis of Rule of Law.</span> A jury, as trier of fact, may conclude that a mentally deficient person is liable for tortious conduct; however, in so doing the jury must find that the actor intended offensive or harmful consequences.

Facts
Everly, an elderly woman who was placed in a personal care center, began to exhibit erratic behavior. She became easily agitated, and would occasionally act aggressively toward others. An examination by a physician revealed that Everly was suffering from Alzheimer’s disease. In one instance, she struck Plaintiff in the jaw. In Plaintiff’s actions for assault and battery, the trial judge instructed the jury that Everly’s suffering from Alzheimer’s did not prevent a finding that she acted intentionally, even if her reasons or motive were irrational.<span class="heading">Issue.</span> At issue, is whether an intentional tort requires some proof that the tortfeasor not only intended to contact another person, but also intended that the contact be harmful or offensive to the other person.

Held
The court reversed the judgment and remanded, having found that the jury determined that alleged tortfeasor did not intend to cause offensive or harmful consequences by her act.

Discussion
Intentional torts may be committed in one of two ways: 1) when the defendant intends to cause the harm resulting from his or her actions; and 2) when the defendant has substantial certainty that harm will result.

