Citation
439 F.2d 477, 141 U.S. App. D.C. 370 1970 U.S. App.

Brief Fact Summary
Sarah B. Kline (Plaintiff) was attacked in the common hallway of Massachusetts Avenue Apartment Corp.’s (Defendant’s) apartment building. Plaintiff brought suit against Defendant to recover the personal injuries she sustained.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A landlord has a duty to take steps to protect tenants from foreseeable criminal acts committed by third parties

Facts
Plaintiff leased an apartment from Defendant. At the time Plaintiff first signed the lease, a doorman was on duty twenty-four hours a day and there was an employee behind the main desk at all times. Approximately seven years later, Defendant had discontinued posting a doorman, security gates were left open, and an employee was not always behind the main desk. One evening, Plaintiff was criminally assaulted and robbed outside of her apartment in the common hallway, which was under the exclusive control of Defendant. Two weeks prior, another female tenant had been similarly attack in the same hallway. Plaintiff brought suit against Defendant. The district court dismissed the complaint and Plaintiff appealed.

Issue
Should a duty be placed on a landlord to take steps to protect tenants from foreseeable criminal acts committed by third parties?

Held
Yes. Judgment reversed.

Dissent
(Justice MacKinnon) Plaintiff has not proved that the alleged negligence was the proximate cause of the assault or that it contributed to it in any way. It could have been a tenant or a guest visiting the property who attacked Plaintiff. Also, Plaintiff was not led to believe that she would get the same standard of protection in 1966 that was furnished in 1959. Her original lease had terminated and she was on a month-to-month basis. Thus, whatever contract existed was created at the beginning of the month. If tenants expect increased protection, they can move to apartments where it is available and presumably pay higher rent.

Discussion
Here, the court discusses the general rule that a private person does not have a duty to protect another from a criminal attack by a third person. However, as this case shows, that rule has exceptions for persons who share a special relationship. A landlord does owe a duty to a tenant to provide protection against the intentional criminal acts of third person. A large part of the court’s reasoning is that the landlord is in the best position to provide protection. If there were no duty imposed upon the landlord, a large apartment complex such as Plaintiff’s would go unprotected. In this case, the special relationship between the Plaintiff and Defendant justifies the abandonment of the general rule outlined above and the imposition of the duty of protection against Defendant.

