Citation
17 Cal. 3d 425, 551 P.2d 334, 131 Cal. Rptr. 14, 1976 Cal.

Brief Fact Summary
Dr. Lawrence Moore’s (Defendant’s) mentally disturbed patient killed Tatiana Tarasoff (Tarasoff). Tarasoff’s parents (Plaintiffs) argued that Defendant owed Plaintiff a duty to warn.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
When the avoidance of foreseeable harm requires a defendant to control the conduct of another person, or to warn of such conduct, the common law has traditionally imposed liability only if the defendant bears some special relationship to the dangerous person or to the potential victim.

Facts
Moore (Defendant) was a psychologist at the University of California (Defendant) hospital. Posenjit Poddar (Poddar) was an outpatient at Defendant’s hospital. Moore diagnosed Poddar with paranoid schizophrenic reaction, acute and severe. Poddar told Moore that he intended to kill Tarasoff, because she was unresponsive to his romantic advances. Upon Moore’s request, the campus police briefly detained Poddar. Moore’s superior (Defendant) then released Poddar. Tarasoff was not warned of Poddar’s threats or condition. Poddar killed Tarasoff. Plaintiffs brought a wrongful death action against Defendants. Plaintiffs’ complaint predicates liability on two grounds: Defendants’ failure to warn and failure to confine Poddar.

Issue
Do Defendants, psychologists, owe a duty to Tarasoff, a third person, based on the relationship with a patient?

Held
Yes. Judgment for Plaintiffs.

Dissent
(Justice Clark) Confidentiality is essential to effectively treat the mentally ill and imposing a duty on doctors to disclose patient threats to potential victims greatly impairs treatment. The Legislature has already decided that effective and confidential treatment is preferred over imposition of a duty to warn.

Discussion
In this case, the court held that a special relationship existed between Plaintiff and Defendant. Because of this special relationship, Defendant owed Plaintiff the duty to w

