Brief Fact Summary
A common law presumption of an objective standard no longer governs the mental state requirement for criminal statutes in a situation where Parliament fails to specify a mens rea requirement.

Facts
A common law presumption of an objective standard no longer governs the  mental state requirement for criminal statutes in a situation where  Parliament fails to specify a mens rea requirement.15 years old B (D)  was constantly pestering a 13 year old girl for oral sex. He was charged  to court for inciting a child under the age of 14 to commit gross  indecency after the girl refused his demands. An intention to commit the  act with a child under the age of 14 as an element of crime was not  expressly provided for in the statute under which he was prosecuted. B’s  (D) honest belief that the girl was over 14 years of age was the  defense he had during trial but this was rejected by the judges. B (D)  pled guilty for the allegation while preserving his right to appeal the  judgment. He later appealed the court’s rejection of his “honest belief”  defense to the House of Lords.

Issue
does a common law presumption of an objective standard govern the mental state requirement for criminal statutes in a situation where Parliament fails to specify a mens rea requirement?

Held
(Nicholls, L.) No. A common law presumption of an objective standard no longer governs the mental state requirement for criminal statutes in a situation where Parliament fails to specify a mens rea requirement. In this case, the requisite mental state in the statute at issue has not being defined by Parliament. The current common-law standard being used today is determining whether the defendant holds an honest belief of the pertinent facts in his defense. The appropriate presumption to apply in this case is the “honest belief” standard, although a common-law presumption on mens rea can also be applied. The ruling was reversed.

Concurrence
(Steyn, L.) Defendants should henceforth be tried based on their honest belief of the facts because the old rule is no longer applicable.

Discussion


