Citation
22 Ill.501 U.S. 957, 111 S. Ct. 2680, 115 L. Ed. 2d 836 (1991)

Brief Fact Summary
Petitioner Harmelin was convicted of possessing 672 grams of cocaine and sentenced to life imprisonment without parole. Petitioner claims that the punishment of life imprisonment is significantly disproportionate to possession of cocaine and therefore is unconstitutionally cruel and unusual under the Eight Amendment.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The Eighth Amendment, which provides that “excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted”, does not contain a proportionality guarantee.

Facts
Petitioner was convicted of possessing 672 grams of cocaine and sentenced to life imprisonment without parole. Petitioner claims that the punishment of life imprisonment is significantly disproportionate to possession of cocaine and therefore is unconstitutionally cruel and unusual under the Eight Amendment as applied to the states via the Fourteenth Amendment. The Michigan Court of Appeals affirmed the conviction and the United States Supreme Court granted review.

Issue
Does the Eighth Amendment of the United States Constitution contain a proportionality guarantee with regard to punishment?

Held
No. Judgment affirmed.

Dissent
The majority, in its discussion with regard to the existence of a proportionality requirement with regard to the death penalty, has recognized that a punishment may violate the Eighth Amendment if it is “contrary to the evolving standards of decency that mark the progress of a maturing society.” The dissent argues that such a recognition requires that the three prong test set forth in Solem v. Helm, 463 U.S. 277 (1983), which looks at the harm caused, the sentence imposed on other criminals in the same jurisdiction and the sentences imposed for the same crime in other jurisdictions, be used to evaluate whether or not the statute in question violates the Eight Amendment.

Concurrence
The majority overruled Solem v. Helm, 463 U.S. 277 (1983), which recognized a general principle of proportionality. Stare decisis requires that we adhere to the narrow proportionality principle that has existed in our Eight Amendment jurisprudence for 80 years. Such a requirement does not require strict proportionality between the crime and the sentence but instead forbids extreme sentences that are grossly disproportionate to the crime. The concurring judges agreed, however, that in the case at bar, the sentence was not grossly disproportionate to the crime and therefore agree with the majority decision.

Discussion
This case, according to the casebook notes, has been interpreted as preserving the proportionality requirement in accordance with the concurring opinion.

