Citation
22 Ill.36 Cal.3d 638, 205 Cal.Rptr. 492, 685 P.2d 52 (1984)

Brief Fact Summary
Defendants were convicted of violating a provision of California’s penal code that prohibits the commission of lewd acts with children under the age of 14 and argued that mistake as to the victim’s age is a defense to the crime charged.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Mistake of age is not a viable defense in cases of statutory rape.

Facts
Defendants were charged with violating section 288 of California’s penal code, which prohibits persons from committing lewd acts with children under the age of 14. At trial the complainant, who was 13 at the time the complained of actions took place, admitted that she had told the defendants that she was older than 16 and that she in fact looked older than 16. The defendants argued at trial that a good faith belief as to the age of the victim acts as a defense to the charge, but were convicted nonetheless. D’s appeal.

Issue
Is a reasonable mistake as to a victim’s age a defense to a charge of lewd conduct with a child under the age of 14 where the statute is silent as to state of mind?

Held
No. Judgment affirmed.

Dissent
Judge Grodin concurred in part and dissented in part. The dissent speaks with regard to strict liability crimes and comments that they generally are confined to regulatory and public welfare offenses where the penalties are much smaller than in rape cases and the conviction does not damage the offenders reputation in the way a statutory rape conviction does. Grodin believes that there should instead be a reasonableness standard that is set very high with regard to mistake of age as opposed to making the crime one of strict liability.

Discussion
The holding in this case, that mistake of age in statutory rape cases is not a viable defense, represents the majority opinions in most jurisdictions as well as the viewpoint of the Model Penal Code. Therefore, like in other strict liability cases, punishment can ensue for actions taken without any culpability.

