Brief Fact Summary
Two agents, who were convicted of destroying a ship docked in New Zealand, were removed by France on the premise that they required emergency medical treatment.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The wrongfulness of an act of a state not in consonance with an international obligation is precluded by the “distress” of the author state if there exists a situation of extreme peril in which the organ of the state has, at that particular moment, no means of saving himself or persons entrusted to his care other than to act in a manner inconsistent with the requirements of the obligation.

Facts
A civilian vessel which was docked in New Zealand was destroyed by a team of French agents. The agents, Mafart and Prieur, were extradited and New Zealand sought reparation from the incident. The agents were transferred to a French military facility and subsequently transported to Paris on the basis that they needed medical attention. This dispute was brought before an arbitral tribunal in which New Zealand demanded a declaration that France had breached its obligation and ordered that it return the agents to the facility for the remainder of their sentences.

Issue
Is the wrongfulness of an act of a state not in consonance with an international obligation precluded by the “distress” of the author state if there exists a situation of extreme peril in which the organ of the state has, at that particular moment, no means of saving himself or persons entrusted to his care other than to act in a manner inconsistent with the requirements of the obligation at issue?

Held
Yes. the wrongfulness of an act of a state not in consonance with an international obligation is precluded by the “distress” of the author state if there exists a situation of extreme peril in which the organ of the state has, at that particular moment, no means of saving himself or persons entrusted to his care other than to act in a manner inconsistent with the requirements of the obligation.

Discussion
France contention that the circumstances here constituted a force  majeure was rejected by the court. “force majeure” is usually invoked to  justify unintentional acts and refers to “unforeseen external events”  that render it “materially impossible” to act in conformity with the  obligation.

