Citation
193 N.Y. 349, 86 N.E. 1,1908 N.Y. 654

Brief Fact Summary
Clark (Plaintiff) and West (Defendant) entered into a written contract for the former to write and prepare for publication a series of law books. The Special Term overruled the Defendant’s Motion to Dismiss. The Appellate Division reversed and sustained Defendant’s Motion to Dismiss. Plaintiff appealed.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A waiver of an express condition occurs when a party who owes a conditional duty may indicate that he will not insist upon the occurrence of the condition before performing.

Facts
Plaintiff and Defendant entered into a contract for the Plaintiff to write a series of law books. After the Plaintiff wrote “Clark & Marshall on Corporations” the parties had a disagreement. The contract had a clause that the Plaintiff agrees to abstain from the use of intoxicating liquors during the continuance of the contract and payment is dependent on the faithful performance of this condition and others to the contract. The Plaintiff was to be paid $6.00 a page if he did not drink and $2.00 if he did not comply with the condition. While Plaintiff was writing, the Defendant assures him that strict compliance to this condition is not necessary. Plaintiff started drinking and Defendant refused to pay him. Plaintiff’s complaint alleges that he is due $2.00 per page for the work completed but Defendant refused to pay him. Plaintiff’s breach of contract claim alleged that Defendant took out a copyright on Plaintiff’s work on corporations in the name of a publishing company, whi

Issue
Whether Plaintiff’s abstention from alcohol was an express condition or merely a promise?

Held
The provision was an express condition. Judgment is reversed.

Discussion
The non-occurrence of a condition is excused in some particular instances. A party who owes a conditional duty may indicate that he will not insist upon the occurrence of the condition before performing. In other words, the party is said to waive the condition.

