Citation
37 N.Y.2d 466, 335 N.E.2d 320, 373 N.Y.S.2d 102,  1975 N.Y. 2047

Brief Fact Summary
Feld (Plaintiff) and Henry S. Levy & Sons, Inc. (Defendant) entered into a contract where the Plaintiff agreed to buy and the Defendant agreed to sell bread crumbs. Both parties appeal from a judgment of the Appellate Division affirming the Special Term’s decision denying Plaintiff’s Motion for Summary Judgment and rejecting Defendant’s request for a summary judgment of dismissal.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Under an output contract, good faith cessation of production of the subject of the contract terminates any further obligations and excuses performance by the party discontinuing production.

Facts
Plaintiff, who operates Crushed Toast Company, and Defendant, who is in the wholesale bread baking business, entered into a contract in which Defendant agreed to sell and Plaintiff to purchase all bread crumbs produced by the Seller for a certain period of time. The agreement was deemed to automatically renew for successive renewal periods of one year with the right of either party to terminate by giving not less than sixth months. A faithful performance bond was delivered by Plaintiff at inception of the contractual relationship. A substantial quantity of bread crumbs was sold by Defendant to Plaintiff but Defendant stopped producing the bread crumbs. Evidence demonstrated that it was uneconomical for the Defendant to continue operating his oven, however, no steps were taken to acquire another oven. The oven was destroyed and Defendant used the area as a computer room. Defendant indicated to the Plaintiff, that the Plaintiff would resume bread crumb production if the contract

Issue
Whether an output contract requires the seller to continue manufacturing the subject of the contract through the contract term?

Held
No, as long as cessation is in good faith. Judgment affirmed.

Discussion
Agreements to sell all the goods or services a party may produce or perform to another party are output contracts.

