Citation
407 N.W.2d 206, 1987 N.D. 318, 2 I.E.R. Cas. (BNA) 321

Brief Fact Summary
Elmer Hillesland (Plaintiff) filed suit against Federal Land Bank Association of Grand Forks and Federal Land Bank of St. Paul (Defendants) challenging his discharge. Plaintiff appealed the decision of the district court granting a Motion for Summary Judgment dismissing the action.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
There is no action for breach of implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing in an at-will employment contract.

Facts
Plaintiff began working for the Association in 1956, and became chief executive officer in 1972. Then in June of 1983 he was discharged. During his employment, Plaintiff learned that the Westbys were having financial difficulties and that they had received an offer to purchase their farm from another customer of the Defendant. Plaintiff contacted the Westbys to offer financial counseling and they said they wanted to sell the farm. This led to an offer to purchase by Plaintiff’s sons. Plaintiff submitted the details of the transaction to the board of directors for their approval. The board approved the transaction, the Plaintiff then went to the other Bank for approval and they stated that it was not in position to disapprove the transaction but expressed concern over the conflict of interest. The sale was then consummated. Bank then began to investigate the sale and informed the Plaintiff at a board meeting that he was being discharged because Plaintiff had violated written st

Issue
Whether under the Farm Credit Act there is an implied right of action for wrongful discharge?

Held
No, on all issues. Judgment affirmed.

Dissent
The dissent disagrees with the portion of the opinion that states that there is not a duty of good faith. The dissent believes that there is an obligation to not act in bad faith.

Discussion
The at-will rule discussed in the case is that an employer may discharge an employee for good cause, for no cause or even for cause morally wrong, without being thereby guilty of legal wrong.

