Citation
272 Pa. 172,  116 A. 150,  1922 Pa. 794

Brief Fact Summary
Iron Trade Products Co. (Plaintiff) and Wilkoff Co. (Defendant) had a contract for the purchase and delivery of rails from the Defendant. Defendant appeals from a judgment for the Plaintiff and the dismissal of Defendant’s affidavit of defense and supplement.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
If a party seeking to obtain specific goods entered into a contract for a quantity of goods and then made performance on the contract by the seller more difficult by making other purchases, which increased the scarcity of the availability of the goods, their conduct is no excuse for refusing to perform the prior contract.

Facts
Plaintiff entered into a written contract with the Defendant for the purchase of 2,600 tons of section relaying rails to be delivered in New York harbor fro $41.00 a ton. Defendant failed to deliver any of the rails and subsequently Plaintiff brought this suit alleging that it was compelled to purchase the rails elsewhere and that the market price of the rails at the time and place of delivery was $50.00 per ton and claimed damages, the difference between what it had been compelled to pay and the contract price. Defendant filed an affidavit of defense and supplement, the court held it insufficient and entered judgment for the Plaintiff. Defendant appealed.

Issue
Whether a party, who enters into a contract for specific goods and subsequently made performance on the contract by the seller more difficult, is excused for refusal to perform the prior contract?

Held
No. Judgment affirmed.

Discussion
In every contract there is an implied covenant that neither party shall do anything, which will have the effect of destroying the right of the other party to receive the benefits of the contract. This covenant is also known as the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing. Good faith means honesty in fact and the observance of reasonable commercial standards of fair dealing in the particular trade.

