Citation
529 S.W.2d 258, 1975 Tex. App. 3128

Brief Fact Summary
Mrs. Fred M. Cope (Plaintiff) sued O.W. Grun Roofing and Construction Co. (Defendant) to set aside a mechanic’s lien filed by Defendant and for damages in the sum of $1,500,000.00 suffered by Plaintiff as a result of the alleged failure of Defendant to perform a contract calling for the installation of a new roof on Plaintiff’s home. Defendant appealed from a judgment for the Plaintiff.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A contractor who tenders performance so deficient that it can only be remedied by completely redoing the work for which the contract was established has not substantially performed his duties.

Facts
Plaintiff and Defendant entered into a written contract, which required Defendant to install a new roof on Plaintiff’s home for $648.00. The contract specified that the color of the roof was to be russet glow. After the roof was installed, Plaintiff noticed that the roof had yellow streaks. Defendant agreed to remedy the situation and removed the nonconforming shingles. However, the replacement shingles did not match the remainder, even after time the color was different. Therefore, it can be reasonably assumed that the only way to have a uniform roof would be to install a completely new roof. Plaintiff sued Defendant to set aside a mechanic’s lien and to recover damages as a result of Defendant’s failure to perform a contract to install a new roof on Plaintiff’s home. Defendant filed a cross-claim for the amount, which Plaintiff agreed to pay Defendant for installation of the roof and for foreclosure of the mechanic’s lien on Plaintiff’s home. The trial court awarded $122.60

Issue
Whether Defendant’s actions constituted specific performance under the contract?

Held
No. Judgment affirmed.

Discussion
When determining if a breach is material, an important factor is the extent to which the non-breaching party is deprived of the benefit, which she reasonably expected from the contract. When determining the extent to which the non-breaching party has been injured, the principle reason for which the parties entered into the contract must be considered.

