Citation
51 F.3d 1293, 1995 U.S. App.

Brief Fact Summary
A nationwide class action brought on behalf of hemophiliacs (Plaintiffs) infected by the AIDS virus as a consequence of using Defendants’ products. Defendants are the drug companies who manufacture blood solids used by hemophiliacs. (Defendants) Defendants filed with the court of appeals, a Petition for Writ of Mandamus requesting that the court of appeals direct the district judge to rescind his order certifying the case as a class action.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
In order to obtain a Writ of Mandamus to review a judgment, the ruling of the lower court must inflict irreparable harm and exhibit an abuse in judicial discretion.

Facts
This suit arises out of the infection of a substantial fraction of the hemophiliac population of this country by the AIDS virus, because the blood supply was contaminated by the virus. Hemophiliacs depend on blood solids that contain clotting factors, whose absence is the cause of the disease. The blood solids are concentrated from blood obtained from donors. Thus, if one of the donors is infected with the AIDS virus, the probability that the blood solids manufactured from this blood will be infected is high. Plaintiffs presented evidence that over 2,000 hemophiliacs have died of AIDS and that half or more of the remaining hemophiliacs may be HIV-positive. Three hundred lawsuits, involving some 400 plaintiffs, have been filed, 60% of them in state courts, and 40% in federal district courts under diversity jurisdiction. Plaintiffs base their claim on

Issue
Whether a Petition for Writ of Mandamus to review should be granted?

Held
Yes. Mandamus to review is granted. There are two conditions for the granting of a mandamus. The first condition requires that the challenged ruling of the district court have inflicted irreparable harm, in other words, harm that cannot be rectified by an appeal from the final judgment. The second condition requires that the ruling be described as an abuse of judicial discretion. In the instant case, the ruling of the district court will inflict irreparable harm. If the class had not been certified, the Defendants would be facing 300 suits and more may be filed. However, only a few more suits are likely to be filed, because the statute of limitations is expiring since the blood supply has been safe since 1985. The potential damages in 300 lawsuits are great. Class actions may also put the Defendant under pressure to settle the suit. This pressure to settle, however, must be

Dissent
The dissent argues that they would have denied the Defendants the Petition for Writ of Mandamus. The class action, if it continued, would resolve only the question of whether Defendants were negligent in distributing the blood solids. The law requires that the district court judge’s plan be given the opportunity to succeed.

Discussion
A writ of mandamus is a writ issued by a superior court to compel a lower court to perform duties correctly. There are two conditions for determining whether the granting of a writ of mandamus is appropriate: 1) whether the challenged ruling of the district court has inflicted irreparable harm, in other words, harm that cannot be rectified by an appeal from the final judgment; and 2) whether ruling is as an abuse of judicial discretion.

