Citation
810 N.W.2d 582 (Mich. 2012) [2012 BL 102741]

Brief Fact Summary
Defendant was convicted of grand theft under a California Penal Code. The case went to jury with instructions relating to larceny by trick and obtaining property under false pretenses. Defendant claims there was no unlawful taking of any kind.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
In order to be convicted of obtaining property by false pretenses, the defendant must have made a false pretense or representation with intent to defraud the owner of his property, and the owner was in fact defrauded.

Facts
Defendant Ashley was the business manager of a corporation established for the purpose of “introducing people.” Evidence at trial revealed Ashley obtained a loan of about $7,000 from Mrs. Russ, a woman 70 years of age, by promising her the loan would be secured by a first mortgage on certain improved property of the corporation. Ashley told Mrs. Russ the money would be used to build a theater on property owned by the corporation. However, the corporation leased but did not own the improved property. The theater was never built, and Ashley used the money for the corporation’s operating expenses. After several discussions with the Defendant over his failure to deliver the first mortgage, Mrs. Russ finally agreed to receive a note from the corporation secured by a second trust deed on some unimproved property owned by the corporation. She subsequently received four delinquent checks from the Defendant and he requested an extension. Mrs. Russ granted the extension after Ashley thr

Issue
Did the Defendant make a false pretense or representation with the intent to defraud the owner of her property?

Held
Yes. The judgment and order denying a new trial are affirmed.

Concurrence
Judge Schauer concurs in the judgment: The evidence does establish that the Defendant made false representations. In a case of this nature, the matter to be proved is purely subjective. The proof will necessarily be of objective acts, and such proof of the alleged crime has been recognized as unreliable. The rule that the majority develops determines that an inference can be made as to a man’s intentions concerning a promise to pay in the future or to perform an act at a future date. For example, if it can be inferred that the man knew he would be unable to pay the debt, a court of law will be bound to affirm a conviction for obtaining property by false pretenses.

Discussion
In order for an individual obtain property by false pretenses, it must be proved that any misrepresentations of fact alleged were made knowingly and with intent to deceive.

