Citation
441P92-6, 2012 BL 97483 (N.C. Apr. 12, 2012)

Brief Fact Summary
Respondent was an attorney retained by a woman to secure a divorce from her husband. With the consent of his client, Respondent arranged to obtain evidence of infidelity by hiring a woman to lure the man into having sex with her. Thereafter, Respondent sent the man a letter making a private accusation of adultery in support of a demand for a cash settlement in the divorce.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A demand for settlement in a civil action made with intent to extort payment, along with a malicious threat to divulge the wrongdoer’s criminal conduct against his will, constitutes blackmail.

Facts
Respondent was an attorney hired by a woman named Norma Morin to obtain a divorce from her husband. Because Morin did not have any money, Respondent agreed to work on a contingent fee basis. The couple owned assets worth about $50,000, including a motel where they previously resided. With the consent of his client, Respondent arranged to obtain evidence of infidelity by hiring a woman to lure the man into having sex with her in one of the motel rooms. After the woman enticed Morin’s husband, Respondent entered the room and took pictures of them. Thereafter, Respondent sent Morin’s husband a letter making a private accusation of adultery in support of a demand for a cash settlement of $175,000 in the divorce. The letter also provided that any and all photographs would be returned to him and that Morin would not divulge any incriminating information about him to the Internal Revenue Service or the United States Customs Service. Furthermore, the letter stated a date by which Mori

Issue
Did Respondent’s actions with regard to the content of the letter rise to the level of blackmail?

Held
Yes. Judgment affirmed.

Discussion
The Respondent’s acts were done with the intent to extort a large contingent fee to his personal advantage. Ordinarily, an attorney is prohibited from receiving a contingent fee in a divorce action by the rules of professional conduct.

