Citation
23 Cal. App. 4th 312, 28 Cal. Rptr. 2d 242, 1994 Cal. App. 237, 94 Cal. Daily Op. Service 1953

Brief Fact Summary
Geoffrey and Charlene Jue, (Appellants) brought suit against Kenn and Victoria Smiser, (Respondents), seeking damages in connection with the sale of Respondent’s home to Appellants on the theories of fraud, concealment, and negligent misrepresentation among others. Respondents successfully moved for summary judgment asserting that it was undisputed that appellants had actual knowledge of all material facts before the close of escrow and nevertheless voluntarily elected to proceed with the purchase of the property in the face of such knowledge.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
When a party learns that he has been defrauded, he may, instead of rescinding, elect to stand on the contract and sue for damages, and, in doing so, his continued performance of the agreement does not constitute a waiver of his action for damages.

Facts
Respondents listed their home for sale. Shortly thereafter, an article appeared in the San Francisco Chronicle indicating that Julia Morgan, a famous architect, had designed the home. Appellants saw the article and made arrangements to view the house. At the viewing they were given a brochure that indicated the house was an “Authenticated, Julia Morgan Design, built in 1917.”Appellants and Respondents executed a contract for the sale of the home.

Issue
Whether a purchaser of real property who learns of potential material misrepresentations about the property after execution of a purchase agreement but before consummation of the sale may close escrow and sue for damages?

Held
Yes. Public policy dictates that a purchaser may close the sale and sue for damages.

Discussion
The trial court granted summary judgment predicated on Appellants’ supposed lack of “justifiable reliance” on Respondents’ fraud when appellants closed escrow. Any party who learns of a fraud before a contract has been completed will not complete it in “reliance” on the fraud. The issue is whether or not at the time the purchase agreement was struck Appellants relied on Respondents’ alleged misrepresentations. No evidence was presented to negate Appellants’ claim that they did rely on those alleged misrepresentations at that time.

