Citation
250 U.S. 616, 40 S. Ct. 17, 63 L. Ed. 1173, 1919 U.S. 1784.

Brief Fact Summary
While engaged in a war against Germany, the United States deployed a contingent of Marines to Russia. Defendants, a group of Russian immigrants, perceived the deployment as an attempt by the United States to suppress the Bolshevik Revolution. In protest, Defendants distributed leaflets by airplane, denouncing the President of the United States, capitalism, and German militarism.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Speech is not constitutionally protected when the words used under the circumstances present a clear and present danger of bringing about an evil Congress has a right to prevent. Schenck v. United States, 249 U.S. 47 (1919).

Facts
The United States and Russia were at war against Germany. During the war, the Bolsheviks came to power in Russia and signed a peace treaty with Germany. Thereupon, the United States deployed a contingent of Marines to Russia. Defendants, a group of Russian immigrants, perceived the deployment as an attempt by the United States to suppress the Bolshevik Revolution. In protest, Defendants distributed two types of leaflets by airplane. The first leaflet included denouncements of the “President’s cowardice,” capitalism, German militarism. The second leaflet was headed “Workers – Wake Up,” and instructed the same to spit in the face of false military propaganda. Consequently, Defendants were convicted of violating the Espionage Act of 1917. Among the charges brought against Defendants were (1) for conspiring to incite, provoke or encourage resistance to the United States (Count 3); and (2) for conspiring to urge curtailment of the production of war materials with the intent to hind

Issue
Were the convictions of Defendants for distributing the leaflets during a time of war permissible under the First Amendment?

Held
Yes. The convictions on counts three and four are affirmed.

Dissent
Justice Holmes:

Discussion
The Supreme Court of the United States was evidently impressed by the politics of the day when deciding this case. The majority of this case in the casebook is devoted to Justice Holmes’ dissent. His opinion is widely regarded as the point of embarkation for the Supreme Court’s modern free speech jurisprudence.

