Citation
343 U.S. 250, 72 S. Ct. 725, 96 L. Ed. 919, 1952 U.S. 2799.

Brief Fact Summary
The Petitioner, Beauharnais (Petitioner), president of the White Circle League, organized the distribution of a leaflet setting forth a petition calling on the mayor and the city counsel of Chicago to “halt the further encroachment, harassment and invasion of white people, their property, neighborhoods and persons, by the Negro.” The leaflet called for “one million self-respecting white people in Chicago to unite” and added that, “if persuasion and the need to prevent the white race from becoming mongrelized by the Negro will not unite us, then the aggressions, rapes, robberies, knives, guns and marijuana of the Negro surely will.” Attached to the leaflet was an application for membership in the league.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
If an utterance directed at an individual may be the object of criminal sanctions, the court cannot deny to a State power to punish the same utterance directed at a defined group, unless the court can say that it is a willful and purposeless restriction unrelated to the peace and well-being of a state.

Facts
As a result of the Petitioner’s participation in the distribution of the leaflet, he was convicted under an Illinois state statute declaring it unlawful for any person to distribute any publication “that portrays depravity, criminality, unchastity or lack of virtue of a class of citizens, of any race, color, creed or religion, which publication exposes those citizens to contempt, derision, or obloquy or which is productive of breach of the peace or riots.” At trial, the judge refused to instruct the jury that in order to convict, they must find “that the article complained of was likely to produce a clear and present danger of serious substantive evil that rises far above public inconvenience, annoyance or unrest.” The trial judge also refused to consider the Petitioner’s offer of proof on the issue of truth, because, under Illinois law, the defense of truth is unavailable in a prosecution for criminal libel unless “the truth of all facts in the utterance be shown together wit

Issue
Whether the United States Constitution (Constitution) prevents a state from punishing libels directed at designated collectivities and that are flagrantly disseminated?]

Held
The Supreme Court of the United States (Supreme Court) finds no warrant in the Constitution for denying Illinois the power to pass the law under attack in this case. As a result, the judgment of the trial court is affirmed.

Dissent
Dissenting opinions were offered by both Justices William Douglas (J. Douglas) and Hugo Black (J. Black).

Discussion
The message communicated by the Petitioner and the White Circle League is not subject to a willful and purposeless restriction unrelated to the peace and well-being of the State of Illinois. The majority decision reviewed the recent history of race relations in the state and determined that the ordinance at issue and its application were related to the peace and well-being of the state.

