Citation
314 U.S. 252, 62 S. Ct. 190, 86 L. Ed. 192, 1941 U.S. 1084.

Brief Fact Summary
The president of a union was found guilty of contempt of court for publishing a copy of a telegram saying his union would strike if an adverse decision, subject to a motion to a new trial, was enforced. The publisher of the Los Angeles Times was found guilty of contempt for publishing editorials on the pending sentencings of two members of a labor union. The propriety of the convictions was brought into question.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The substantive evil must be extremely serious and the degree of imminence extremely high before utterances can be punished.

Facts
While a motion for a new trial was pending, Bridges, president of a union against whom a trial judge ruled, published a copy of a telegram saying his union would strike if the adverse decision was enforced. As a result, Bridges was found guilty of contempt of court. In a companion case, Times-Mirror Co. v. Superior, the publisher of the Los Angeles Times was found guilty of contempt for publishing editorials on the pending sentencings of two members of a labor union. Bridges and Times-Mirror claimed that the contempt convictions violated their First Amendment constitutional rights.

Issue
Did the contempt convictions of Bridges and Times-Mirror violate their rights of free speech and free press?

Held
Yes. The lower court if reversed.

Dissent
Justice Felix Frankfurter (J. Frankfurter) While freedom of speech and the press applies to the work of the courts, freedom of expression cannot be allowed to nullify our constitutional guarantees of an impartial trial.

Discussion
This case draws into conflict two of our most cherished rights: the right to free speech and the right to a fair trial. To balance these competing interests the court takes into account several factors in this case, such as (1) whether the litigation is still pending; (2) the courage and fortitude a judge can be expected to have; (3) whether judges should be able to anticipate certain consequences, without regard for whether particular information is published, etc.

