Citation
274 U.S. 357, 47 S. Ct. 641; 71 L. Ed. 1095; 1927 U.S. 1011.

Brief Fact Summary
The California Criminal Syndicalism Act (the Act) prohibited any person to knowingly become a member of any organization that advocates “Criminal Syndicalism.” The Defendant, Anita Whitney (Defendant), was affiliated with an organization that adopted a “Left Wing Manifesto” and therefore convicted under the act.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A State may constitutionally prohibit its citizens from knowingly being or becoming a member of an organization that advocates criminal syndicalism consistently with the First Amendment of the United States Constitution (Constitution).

Facts
The Act prohibited any person to knowingly become a member of any organization that advocates the commission of unlawful acts as a means of accomplishing a change in industrial ownership or effecting a political change. The Defendant was a member of the Oakland branch of the Socialist Party, which later formed the Communist Labor Party (”CLP”). The CLP adopted a Left Wing Manifesto similar to that at issue in Gitlow. Shortly thereafter, the Defendant attended a conference in Oakland for the purpose of organizing a California branch of the CLA. As a result, the Appellant was charged under the Act.

Issue
Did the Defendant’s knowingly being or becoming a member of an organization that advocated “criminal syndicalism” involve sufficient danger to the public peace that the State could constitutionally penalize her for it?

Held
Yes. The lower court is affirmed.

Discussion
The Supreme Court is drawing a line here between expression rights exercised in the form of a conspiracy (i.e., rights of association) and expression rights exercised in the form of utterances. At issue in this case is the same type of statute that was at issue in Gitlow. The Supreme Court here, once again, upholds the statute but on different reasoning. J. Brandeis’ concurring opinion evinces a movement to a more stringent and contemporaneous regulation of free speech standard.

