Citation
552 U.S. 932 128 S. Ct. 321 169 L. Ed. 2d 227 2007 U.S.

Brief Fact Summary
The defendant, Ernest Odom (the “defendant”), was charged and convicted of possession of crack cocaine and with intent to distribute crack cocaine.  A search warrant executed on the defendant’s residence revealed eighteen vials of crack cocaine in a bag inside a pillowcase.<span class="heading">Synopsis of Rule of Law.</span> A qualified expert’s opinion may be offered into evidence if it relates to a subject that is not within the understanding of an average person of ordinary experience, education, and knowledge.

Facts
On January 31, 1986, detectives executed a search warrant at the apartment of of the Defendant and C.W., a juvenile.  During the search, Detective Humphrey found a bag containing eighteen vials of crack cocaine in the pillowcase on the bed.  The defendant was charged with possession of a controlled substance and possession with intent to distribute.  The State offered Detective Sergeant Ronald Tierney (”Detective Tierney”) as an expert in illegal narcotics during the trial.  The defendant’s counsel objected, arguing the detective was unqualified because his experience was based on hearsay and could not help the jury.  Detective Tierney was a member of the police force for over sixteen years and was with the narcotics squad for over nine years.  He had participated in over 8,000 investigations and made approximately 4,000 arrests.  Detective Tierney qualified as an expert 1,000 times previously.  The trial court allowed him to testify.  He was asked whether the defendant posses

Issue
Was the state’s expert opinion properly admitted by the trial court?

Held
In reversing the judgment of the lower court, Justice Handler issued the opinion for the Supreme Court of New Jersey, finding that the expert’s opinion was properly admitted.

Discussion
The Supreme Court of New Jersey found the expert’s opinion to be properly admitted because the subject matter was within the expert’s specialized knowledge, and beyond the knowledge of average persons.  Further, the expert’s opinion with regard to intent to distribute did not express a view that the defendant was guilty of the crime charged.

