Citation
299 F.3d 1252,  2002 U.S. App. 59 Fed. R. Serv. 3d (Callaghan) 410; 15 Fla. L. Weekly Fed. C 856

Brief Fact Summary
The defendant, Jacqueline Panseta Brown (the “defendant”), was charged with importing cocaine base and possession of cocaine with intent to distribute.  The cocaine base was found by United States Customs officers in the defendant’s luggage cart frames.  It was found at the time she was traveling to Bermuda via Miami from Jamaica.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Federal Rule of Evidence (”F.R.E.”)  Rule 703 allows experts to rely on data which would not have been admissible if the date is reasonably relied on by experts in their field.

Facts
The defendant was traveling to Bermuda via Miami when United States Customs officers found cocaine base in the frames of her luggage carts.  Cocaine is derived from cocaine base. The defendant denied knowledge of the drugs, but she was indicted for the importation of five hundred grams or more of a substance containing cocaine, and possession with intent to distribute.  The defendant sought to substitute her appointed counsel for her own attorney, David Rowe (”Mr. Rowe”).  Mr. Rowe was substituted as counsel, but filed a motion to withdraw seven weeks later.  This motion was denied and the defendant went to trial represented by Mr. Rowe.  The government moved, prior to trial, to exclude any evidence or argument from the defendant, a black Jamaican national, that she was targeted by United States customs because of her race.  The trial court deferred ruling on this issue.  The government used its first two peremptory strikes against African-Americans, and defense objected based

Issue
Did the trial court err in finding the race-neutral reasons offered by the government for the peremptory strikes were credible?

Held
Circuit Judge Kravitch issued the opinion for the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals and found that the trial court did not err in holding the government’s race-neutral explanations credible in regards to the peremptory strikes.

Concurrence
Circuit Judge Hill issued a concurring opinion to note that he is troubled that the defendant went to trial with a lawyer she did not prefer.

Discussion
The price list was not relied on by the DEA agent in forming his opinion, and it made no reference to drug prices in Bermuda, which was the defendant’s destination, or Jamaica, from where she originated.  The list did not reference prices for cocaine base in any market.

