Citation
397 Pa. 316, 155 A.2d 343, 1959 Pa.

Brief Fact Summary
Plaintiff appealed a judgment from the Somerset County Court of Common Pleas (Pennsylvania) that sustained John Bigan’s (Defendant) demurrer. It dismissed her wrongful death and survival actions against Defendant, which arose from the death of the Plaintiff’s husband, Joseph Yania (Yania).

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A possessor of land becomes subject to liability to a business invitee for any physical harm caused by any artificial or natural condition upon the land: (1) if, but only if, the owner knew or could have discovered the condition which, if known to him he should have realized involved an unreasonable risk of harm to the business invitee; (2) if the owner had no reason to believe the business invitee would discover the condition or realize the risk of harm; and (3) if he invited or permitted the business invitee to enter upon the land without exercising reasonable care to make the condition reasonably safe or give adequate warning to enable him to avoid the harm.

Facts
Defendant was engaged in a coal strip-mining operation, whereby trenches were dug in order to remove coal deposits. One trench contained several feet of water, and Defendant had placed a pump in the trench to remove the water. Defendant asked Yania, the operator of another coal strip-mining operation, to assist him in starting the pump. According to Plaintiff, Defendant taunted and urged Yania to jump into the water. Yania jumped into the water and drowned.

Issue
Did the trial court err in ruling in favor of Defendant?

Held
No. The trial court properly ruled for Defendant. Although Defendant enticed Yania to perform a dangerous act, it was the performance of that act that caused Yania’s death, not the enticement.

Discussion
On appeal, the court stated that the “only inference deductible from the facts alleged in the compliant is that Bigan, by the employment of cajolery and inveiglement, caused such a mental impact on Yania that the latter was deprived of his volition and freedom of choice and placed under a compulsion to jump into the water.”

