Citation
22 Ill.505 U.S. 144, 112 S. Ct. 2408, 120 L. Ed. 2d 120, 34 ERC 1817 (1992)

Brief Fact Summary
The Petitioner, the state of New York (Petitioner), sought a declaration that the Low-Level Radioactive Waste Policy Amendment Act of 1985 (the Act) was violative of the United States Constitution (Constitution).

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The federal government cannot compel a state to “enact a certain statute” or “regulate in a particular way.”

Facts
The Act was enacted to create disposal sites for low level radioactive waste. The Act held each state responsible for designating areas for disposal of waste generated within the state or joining the federal government’s plan for disposing of waste. The Act also allowed the states to enter into compacts that would limit usage of the designated waste disposal sites to waste generated with the state. There are no penalties imposed against nonparticipating states. However, nonparticipating states could not benefit from the financial incentives allowed under the Act, were charged higher surcharges and were required to take title of waste not disposed of within its boarders or be subject to damages. The Petitioner did not participate in the waste disposal plan offered by the federal government and sought to declare the plan violative of the Tenth Amendment. The case was dismissed by the District Court and affirmed by the Court of Appeals. The Petitioner now appeals.

Issue
Whether the federal government can compel a state to enact a statute or regulate in a certain way.

Held
No. Judgment affirmed in part and reversed in part.

Dissent
The Act was created as a result of a compromise between federal and state governments. Providing the states with decisional authority over its waste disposal instead of issuing a blanket federal mandate would support state sovereignty. Congress has enforced “a simple command to state governments to implement legislation” in areas such as “state-operated railroads, state school systems, state prisons, state elections, and a host of other state functions.”

Discussion
Although the federal government has the power to offer incentives to encourage states to participate in its programs, the Constitution does not allow the federal government to coerce a state to regulate in a certain manner.

