Citation
438 U.S. 265, 98 S. Ct. 2733, 57 L. Ed. 2d 750, 1978 U.S.

Brief Fact Summary
A white medical student was denied admission to the Medical School of the University of California at Davis due to the implementation of a special admissions program designed to assure the admission of a specified number of minority students, thereby limiting the number of white students. Strict scrutiny was used to invalidate the medical school’s admission policy.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
When a classification denies an individual opportunities or benefits enjoyed by others solely because of his race or ethnic background, as here, it must be regarded as suspect. When a state’s distribution of benefits or imposition of burdens hinges on the person’s color of skin or ancestry, that individual is entitled to a demonstration that the challenged classification is necessary to promote a substantial state interest. Merely filling a racial quota is not a substantial state interest and thus, is per se unconstitutional.

Facts
Respondent, Mr. Bakke, challenged a special admissions policy implemented by the Petitioner, Medical School of the University of California at Davis, claiming that he was unconstitutionally denied admission based on this policy. The policy was designed to assure the admission of a specified number of minority groups. The State Supreme Court of California held the special admissions program unlawful, enjoined Petitioner from considering the race of any applicant and ordered Respondent’s admission.

Issue
Whether strict scrutiny should be the level of judicial scrutiny applied to the special admissions program.

Held
Yes. Judgment of the State of California Supreme Court affirmed. When a classification denies an individual opportunities or benefits enjoyed by others solely because of his race or ethnic background (as here), it must be regarded as suspect. Since a suspect class is being discriminated against, strict scrutiny must be applied to the special admissions program.

Dissent
Since whites are not a minority, only intermediate review should be used. Therefore, the affirmative admissions program is entirely constitutional.

Discussion
This highly divided case applies strict scrutiny to a higher education admissions policy rendering the policy invalid because the policy was based, in part, on a quota system.

