Citation
130 S. Ct. 1729 176 L. Ed. 2d 176 2010 U.S.

Brief Fact Summary
Mr. Sibley (Appellant) was convicted in the lower court of “defiling, debauching, and carnally knowing a victim, female under the age of 18 years”; the victim, Lula Hawkins (Victim) was the stepdaughter of Appellant.  The lower court admitted various evidence, in the form of letters and testimony concerning Appellant’s character, which forms the basis for Appellant’s appeal.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Evidence of specific acts of sexual deviancy by a female with persons other than the accused defendant are inadmissible when offered for impeachment purposes.

Facts
Victim is the daughter of Appellant’s wife and lived with Appellant while a child; Victim testified that when she was between twelve and thirteen years old, Appellant had nonconsensual sexual contact with her.  Victim also testified that her mother was aware of the actions of Appellant and did nothing to stop them.  Victim eventually left home and moved to St. Louis.

Issues
Did the trial court error in admitting the letters written by Victim’s mother and sent to Victim and Victim’s mother’s cousin? Did the trial court error in admitting the testimony of Victim concerning her pregnancy and Appellant’s responsibility for it, and concerning the “medicine” Appellant allegedly gave to her to cause her to have an abortion? Did the trial court error in admitting the evidence of Appellant’s character for chastity and virtue? Did the trial court error in admitting the evidence of Victim’s past sexual history, including the alleged acts of “illicit intercourse?”

Held
Reversed and remanded.

Concurrence
“Brace, C. J., Macfarlane and Gantt, JJ., concur, except in the fourth paragraph of the opinion, with respect to the admission of evidence  as to the character of defendant for chastity, from which they dissent.  Barclay, J., concurs in the result.  Sherwood, J., dissents from the first paragraph, and concurs in all others.  Robinson, J., concurs.”

Discussion
As to the evidence of Appellant’s character for chastity and virtue, the court reasons that evidence of a general reputation for unchastity is inadmissible, “in any case for the purpose of impeaching the character of a male witness, and especially in a case like the one in hand, where the defendant’s character for chastity is directly involved.”  The court goes so far as to state that:<br />It is a matter of common knowledge that the bad character of a man for chastity does not even in the remotest degree affect his character for truth, when based upon that alone, while it does that of a woman.  It is no compliment to a woman to measure her character for truth by the same standard that you do that of man’s predicated upon character for  chastity.<br />As to the evidence of Victim’s alleged illicit sexual past, the court reasons that, “whatever acts of lewdness she may have been guilty of with others, if any, were no justification or excuse for defendant in having carnal connection with her, if in fact he did have, while she was under his care, control and protection.”  The prejudicial effect, therefore, that admission of such evidence would likely have, renders the evidence inadmissible.

