Citation
22 Ill.112 Ga. App. 63, 143 S.E.2d 671 (Ct. App. 1965)

Brief Fact Summary
Plaintiffs entered into a contract for the purchase of land. On the following day, an ice storm destroyed a great deal of the property, reducing the value of the land. Plaintiffs notified Defendants that they had elected to rescind the contract and demanded return of the money. Defendants refused to rescind the contract.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The prevailing law in is that the risk of loss is normally on the buyer.

Facts
Plaintiffs entered into a contract for the purchase of land, which had pecan trees on it. They paid $10,000.00 earnest money on December 23, 1963, with the balance of the money due on the purchase price to be paid before February 1, 1964. Defendants were to retain possession until then for the purpose of gathering pecans. On the following day, an ice storm reduced the value of the land. Plaintiffs notified Defendants that they had elected to rescind the contract and demanded return of their money. Defendants stated that they were ready, willing, and able to perform their part of the contract, so they refused to rescind the contract. Defendants claim that the value of the property had been reduced by $32,000.00 as the result of the ice storm. The Plaintiffs sued for return of their money. Defendants filed a cross-claim because Plaintiffs’ failure to consummate the deal had resulted in losses, which were equal to the earnest money plus an additional $22,000.00 for the loss of th

Issue
Which party bears the risk of loss?

Held
Plaintiffs. Judgment reversed.

Discussion
This case illustrates the need for the contract for sale of real estate to specify the risk of loss. Because it was not specified in the contract, the loss is placed on the buyers, the Plaintiffs. This is an unfortunate result, because Plaintiffs were not in possession of the real estate and had not obtained legal title to the property. Therefore, Plaintiffs will not get the property and they will have to pay the Defendants for the reduction in value of the property.

