Citation
22 Ill.27 Del. Ch. 411, 38 A.2d 738 (1944)

Brief Fact Summary
Thomas Turner drafted a will devising certain land to his sister, Sallie Turner. Thereafter, Thomas Turner gave a 60-day option to purchase land to Eddington. After Thomas Turner died, Eddington decided to exercise his option to purchase the land.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
In this case the testator evidenced his desire that his sister should have a portion of his land for life. Then he granted an option for 60 days, which he had no way of knowing would be exercised or not. The testator had no enforceable right to the purchase money, thus the application of equitable conversion would not make sense.

Facts
Thomas Turner drafted a will on October 17, 1938, devising certain land to his sister, Sallie Turner. Thereafter, on October 20, 1938, Thomas Turner gave a 60-day option to purchase land (including the land devised to his sister) to Eddington. Thomas Turner died prior to the expiration of the 60-day period, and Eddington, after Turner’s death but prior to the expiration of the option, decided to exercise his option to purchase. When Thomas Turner died, his only heirs at law under the intestate law of the State of Delaware were his two sons, who were also executors of his will. Eddington filed a bill for specific performance of the option agreement as against the estate, a deed was made to Eddington for the property, and the purchase money was deposited into the court. A petition was made to draw the money out of the court. The lower court held that Sallie Turner was entitled to a life interest in such portion of the proceeds as the land devised to her for life bore to the amou

Issue
Does the granting of the option to purchase, made after the execution of the will, and the subsequent exercise of the option after the death of the optionor, operate as an equitable conversion of the property relating back to the date of the option, so that the proceeds of sale would pass to the personal representatives rather than to the specific devisee of the land?

Held
No. Decree affirmed.

Discussion
Note that if the Court had applied the relation back rule to the option in this case it would have been a double legal fiction. First, the equitable conversion is itself a legal fiction. Secondly, the idea that Thomas Turner, decedent, had any right to the purchase money (as he would under equitable conversion) at the time of the giving of the 60-day option would be another fiction, as the court pointed out.

