Citation
22 Ill.3 N.Y.2d 179, 164 N.Y.S.2d 732, 143 N.E.2d 919 (1957)

Brief Fact Summary
While Plaintiff was in possession as vendee under the contract, a fire occurred, defendant vendor received $4,650.00 under the fire loss policy, premiums for which had been paid by Plaintiff. Plaintiff tendered to Defendant the difference between the amount actually unpaid on the contract and the insurance proceeds, but Defendant refused Plaintiff’s demand for credit on the purchase price.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
When a land purchase contract requires the vendee to keep the property insured against fire and there is a fire loss before performance of the contract is completed, any such insurance received by the vendor is to be applied on any remaining balance of the purchase price.

Facts
While Plaintiff was in possession as vendee under the contract, a fire occurred, defendant vendor received $4,650.00 as the fire loss under a policy, premiums for which had been paid by Plaintiff vendee as required by the contract, Plaintiff tendered to Defendant the difference between the amount actually unpaid on the contract and the insurance proceeds, but Defendant refused Plaintiff’s demand that $4,600.00 be credited on the purchase price.

Issue
Which party should receive the benefit of the insurance proceeds?

Held
The Plaintiff vendee. Judgment affirmed.

Dissent
The dissent would apply the rule described in subsection “b” above to allow the vendor, in whose name the insurance policy was at the time of the fire, to receive the benefit of the insurance. The dissent would hold that the insurance was personal to the vendor and was taken out for his own protection from loss.

Discussion
In this case the key fact seemed to be that, even though the policy remained in the vendor’s name, the premiums were being paid by the vendee pursuant to the agreement. In such a case, the vendee apparently felt the need to pay the insurance for his own protection, rather than waiting until the legal title was transferred. In order to maintain insurance on property there must be an insurable interest, which is customarily evidenced by legal title.

