Citation
22 Ill.111 Ohio App. 474, 173 N.E.2d 702 (Ct. App. 1960)

Brief Fact Summary
Sanford agreed to sell land and a house to Breidenbach, but prior to the consummation of the transfer of legal title, the house was destroyed by fire.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The risk of loss should be on the vendor until the time agreed upon for conveyance of the legal title, and thereafter on the purchaser, unless the vendor is then in such default as to be unable specifically to enforce the contract. [4 Pomeroy's Equity Jurisprudence (5 Ed.), Section 1161a].

Facts
Sanford agreed to sell to Breidenbach a parcel of property along with a home situated thereupon for $26,000. Possession of the property, according to the contract, was to pass when title was transferred. Breidenbach did receive two keys to the house and entered inside to check the heating oil situation. The back of the contract provided that Sanford would provide a septic system easement agreement prior to the transfer of title. While the papers necessary to the transfer were being prepared, the house was destroyed by fire. Breidenbach instructed his bank, which was to loan him the purchase money, not to file the deed of record, which had been placed in escrow with the bank. When Breidenbach executed the contract for purchase, he also secured from Northwestern Mutual Insurance Company a policy of insurance of $22,000 to cover him in the event that the property was destroyed by fire. Sanford had maintained insurance on the property in the sum of $20,000. The policy was cancelle

Issue
Two issues are presented:

Held
No to “a” and No to “b”. Judgments according to the findings of this Court.

Discussion
The Court found that the risk of loss was on the vendor. Because the vendor, Sanford, had not been named in Breidenbach’s insurance policy and Breidenbach was not found to have an ownership interest in the property, the logical result was that Sanford, and his insurance company, bore the entire loss. The court was not inclined to specifically enforce the contract to require Breidenbach to purchase the lands and the house for a price greater than the market value.

