Citation
22 Ill.128 F. Supp. 709 (N.D. Cal. 1955)

Brief Fact Summary
The Plaintiffs paid $585,000.00 toward the purchase of timberlands from Defendant, but had defaulted on the terms of payment for more than 60 days. The contract provided a default of more than 60 days, entitled the Defendant to resume possession of the property, retain all payments and cancel the contract.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The court found that the proper relief would be to enter a decree allowing Plaintiffs to complete the contract within a specified time by paying the entire purchase price together with Defendant’s damages resulting from the delay in performance.

Facts
In this federal diversity jurisdiction case, the Plaintiffs, vendees of an installment contract for the purchase of timberlands from Defendant, vendor, for the price of $750,000.00, filed suit for a declaratory judgment and for specific performance. The Plaintiffs paid $585,000.00 toward the purchase, but had defaulted on the terms of payment for more than 60 days. The Defendant had notified the Plaintiffs of the default and then notified Plaintiffs that the contract was cancelled. The contract provided that in the event vendee should continue default for more than 60 days after written demand by the vendor for performance, the vendor was entitled to resume possession of the property, retain all payments and cancel the contract, which provided that time was of the essence.

Issue
Because California law provides relief from forfeiture, what form should the Plaintiffs’ relief take?

Held
Plaintiffs may pay the entire unpaid balance within 60 days of the court’s order and the court will hear evidence on the Defendant’s damages from the breach, and that if Plaintiffs do not pay the entire purchase price within 60 days, the Defendant will have title.

Discussion
The result of this case is quite similar to the mechanics of a foreclosure, though the court did not name the relief as such. The breaching party’s equity in the land will be honored, even though their breach was willful, and they will be accorded an opportunity to redeem their interest by payment of the entire remainder due plus the incidental damages resulting from their willful breach.

