Citation
22 Ill.1134 Mont. 307, 330 P.2d 971 (1958)

Brief Fact Summary
The Mattusheks, two brothers, (Defendants) owned a 3540 acres ranch, which they agreed to sell by appointing an agent, Red Carnell. Carnell found a buyer, Ward (Plaintiff), who tendered a check for $2,500 toward the purchase, and arranged a meeting with the parties. At the meeting, the Plaintiff and Defendants got into a dispute, which caused the Defendants to refuse to convey.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
When construing a written instrument, the Court will not isolate certain phrases of that instrument in order to garner the intent of the parties, but will grasp the instrument by its four corners and in the light of the entire instrument, ascertain the paramount and guiding intention of the parties.

Facts
The Defendants owned a 3540 acres ranch, which they agreed to sell by appointing an agent, Red Carnell. The appointment of agent was an unqualified and exclusive agreement to permit Carnell, for a period of thirty days, to sell their ranch for $30,000.00 and a commission of $1,000.00, with the terms of the sale stated as “Cash to seller, possession Dec.1-1953, seller retains 5% land owner royalty, seller pays 1953 taxes, seller transfers all lease land to buyer.” The Defendants and no one else signed the appointment of the agent. Carnell then found a buyer, the Plaintiff, who tendered a check for $2,500.00 toward the purchase, and arranged a meeting with the parties at which time Plaintiff and Defendants got into a dispute, which caused the Defendants to refuse to convey. The Plaintiff sued Defendants for specific performance. The lower court found that the Plaintiff failed to furnish any memorandum sufficient under the statute of frauds subscribed by Defendants or their autho

Issue
Is the Plaintiff entitled to specific performance (is the writing sufficient under the statue of frauds)?

Held
Yes. Judgment reversed.

Dissent
The dissent would hold that the “Appointment of Agent” signed by Defendants was not a power of attorney, but merely a thirty day listing agreement with the listing real estate agent Carnell. Thus, the Defendants should not be forced to sell to Plaintiff.

Discussion
Clearly, when considering this result, any layperson that attempts to sell land without legal counsel is in great danger of making a costly mistake. In this case if the Defendants had simply qualified the language as to the terms of the sale, the result would likely have been different. Something like, “Any and all sales of any interest in the described real estate is subject to the final approval of the ‘Mattusheks’ and this appointment is not to be construed as an offer to sell,” may have worked.

