Citation
22 Ill.447 U.S. 429, 100 S. Ct. 2271, 65 L. Ed. 2d 244 (1980)

Brief Fact Summary
Reeves is a ready mix concrete distributor from Wyoming that relied on a cement factory in South Dakota for 95% of its cement. When a cement shortage hit South Dakota, the legislature ordered that the cement plant must first supply all of South Dakota’s customers before honoring out of state contracts or commitments. Reeves had to cut production by 76%.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
When a state acts as a market participant, and not as a market regulator, it is not prohibited from buying only from or selling only to local businesses. A state as a market participant may hoard its resources from the national market.

Facts
South Dakota built a cement plant in 1919 to meet the needs of residents and prevent shortages that interfered with and delayed both public and private enterprises. South Dakota operated the plant and soon it was supplying nine nearby states with cement from the plant. Between 1970 and 1977 about 40% of the plant’s output went outside the South Dakota. Reeves was one of the out of state cement buyers who relied on the plant. It bought 95% of its cement from the South Dakota plant. In 1978 there were cement shortages again and the plant was unable to meet all orders. Faced with the same cement shortages that motivated legislatures to create the plant, the State Cement Commission ordered that the plant would first supply all South Dakota customers and then honor all outstanding contractual commitments. The remaining volume would be allocated to out-of-state customers on a first come, first serve basis. Although Reeves had been a customer for 20 years, he did not have a pre-exist

Issue
Can a state as a market participant restrict its trade of goods to citizens or businesses within that state?

Held
Justice Blackmun: Yes. Judgment of the United States Court of Appeals is affirmed.

Dissent
Justice Powell, Brennan, White, and Stevens dissenting:

Discussion
The market participant exception allows states to avoid the Commerce Clause but it may not prevent a state from being subject to the Privileges and Immunities Clause. See United Building and Construction Trades Council of Camden County and Vicinity v. Mayor and Council of the City of Camden.

