Citation
22 Ill.487 U.S. 59, 108 S. Ct. 2260, 101 L. Ed. 2d 56 (1988)

Brief Fact Summary
In order to be admitted to the Virginia bar “on motion,” the applicant must be a permanent resident of Virginia. Myrna Friedman, a Maryland resident, challenged the requirement when she was denied admission to the bar “on motion”.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A state must only accord residents and non-residents equal treatment for privileges bearing on the vitality of the nation as a single unit. If a state denies non-residents such a privilege, it must have a substantial justification for the difference in treatment that substantially relates to the state’s objective in correcting the problem.

Facts
Myrna E. Friedman lived in Virginia from 1977 until 1986. During that time she was admitted to the Illinois Bar and District of Columbia Bar by reciprocity. She worked in Virginia from 1977 to 1982 and in Washington, D.C. from 1982 to 1986. In 1986 she again started working in Virginia at her company’s principal place of business. In 1986 Friedman moved from Virginia to Maryland and applied for admission to the Virginia bar on motion. Virginia denied her motion based on a statute that said attorneys who wish to obtain a license “on motion” must be permanent residents of the Commonwealth. Friedman satisfied all of the requirements except residency.

Issue
Does the Virginia residency requirement for admission to the bar “on motion” burden the right to practice law, a privilege protected by the Privileges and Immunities Clause, by discriminating among otherwise equally qualified applicants solely on the basis of citizenship or residency?

Held
Justice Kennedy opinion: Yes. Decision of the Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit affirmed.

Dissent
Justice Rehnquist and Scalia dissenting.

Discussion
If a Privileges and Immunities question from Article IV arises and the statute denies “fundamental rights” to out-of-state residents merely because they are living outside the state, then the statute is void unless the State can find a valid reason unrelated to the location of the residents that would justify the discrimination.

