Citation
132 S. Ct. 2566 (2012)

Brief Fact Summary
The constitutionality of the Affordable Care Act was challenged by an attack on the "individual mandate," requiring individuals to purchase at least minimal health insurance coverage.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The individual mandate portion of the Affordable Care Act, requiring individuals to purchase a health insurance policy providing a minimum level of coverage, is a tax and therefore does not violate the Constitution.

Facts
[The procedural history is based on a series of federal lawsuits by the State of Florida and others (including the National Federation of Independent Business) (Collectively "Plaintiffs") (Plaintiff) against the United States Department of Health and Human Services (Federal Government) (Defendant) challenging the constitutionality of the Affordable Care Act (the Act), specifically the "individual mandate," which required that all individuals purchase a health insurance policy providing a minimum level of coverage.]  The district court ruled the provision was unconstitutional and, because it could not be severed from the body of the act, caused the entire act to be invalid.  The Federal Government (Defendant) then appealed to the Eleventh Circuit, which affirmed the district court's ruling, but allowed that portion to be severed and upheld the constitutionality of the remainder of the Act.  The Plaintiffs and the Federal Government (Defendant) then sought review of the Eleventh Circuit's decision by the United States Supreme Court.

Issue
Does the individual mandate portion of the Affordable Care Act, requiring individuals to purchase a health insurance policy providing a minimum level of coverage violate the Constitution?

Held
(Roberts, C.J.)  No. The individual mandate portion of the Affordable Care Act, requiring individuals to purchase a health insurance policy providing a minimum level of coverage, is a tax and therefore does not violate the Constitution.  Today the Court resolves a constitutional challenge to a provision of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010: the individual mandate, which requires individuals to purchase a health insurance policy providing a minimum level of coverage.  The Court does not consider whether the Act embodies sound policies; rather, that judgment is entrusted to the elected leaders of the nation.  The Court asks only whether Congress has the power under the Constitution to enact the challenged provision.  This case concerns two powers that the Constitution does grant the Federal Government (Defendant), but which must be read carefully to avoid creating a general federal authority similar to police power.  Congress is authorized by the Constitution to "regulate Commerce with foreign Nations, and among the several States, and with the Indian Tribes."  Our precedents read that to mean that Congress may regulate the "channels of interstate commerce," "persons or things in interstate commerce," and "those activities that substantially affect interstate commerce."  The power can be expansive over activities that substantially affect interstate commerce.  Congress may also "lay and collect Taxes, Duties, Imposts and Excises, to pay the Debts and provide for the common Defense and general Welfare of the United States."  In other words, Congress may tax and spend.  This grant gives the Federal Government (Defendant) considerable influence even in areas where it cannot directly regulate.  The Federal Government (Defendant) may enact a tax on an activity that it cannot authorize, forbid, or otherwise control.

Discussion
The majority's opinion (5-4) revealed the fact that the "individual mandate" portion of the Affordable Care Act was unconstitutional under theories advanced under the Commerce Clause or the Necessary and Proper Clause.  The provision was a proper "tax," which afforded the Federal Government (Defendant) wide latitude in assessing a financial burden for failing to engage in an activity, such as purchasing health insurance.  There was wide outcry that this was counter-intuitive because the government cannot generally compel people to do something they do not wish to do.  The dissenting opinions concluded the mandate was invalid and could not be severed from the rest of the Act, causing it to fail totally.  Commentators noted that the majority's opinion re-asserted the Court's ability to review congressional acts and interestingly disregarded the Federal Government's (Defendant) main arguments that the Act was proper, and instead called attention to the fact that it was a (politically unpopular) tax.

