Citation
22 Ill.27 Or. App. 103, 555 P.2d 477 (Ct. App. 1976)

Brief Fact Summary
In this case, a deed was found unrecorded in the grantee’s personal effects after the death of the grantee. The deed was recorded by the Plaintiff, Townshend (Plaintiff), the personal representative of the grantee’s estate. The grantor was also deceased and had no heirs. The State of Oregon was the interested party on the grantor’s behalf, due to escheat. The deed was titled, “Warranty Timber and Mineral Deed,” but was confusing as to what the deed intended to convey (whether a timber and mineral interest was to vest in the grantee or whether a fee simple interest was to vest in the grantee).

Synopsis of Rule of Law
When there is doubt as to whether the parties intended that a deed transfer a fee simple or a lesser interest in land that doubt should be resolved in favor of the grantee and the greater estate should pass.

Facts
In this case, a deed was found unrecorded, in the grantee’s personal effects after the death of the grantee. The deed was recorded by the Plaintiff, personal representative of the grantee’s estate. The grantor was also deceased and had no heirs. The State of Oregon was the interested party on the grantor’s behalf, due to escheat. The deed was titled, “Warranty Timber and Mineral Deed,” but was confusing as to what the deed intended to convey (whether a timber and mineral interest was to vest in the grantee or whether a fee simple interest was to vest in the grantee). The deed did contain language, which granted to the grantee the right to enter upon the land and cut timber and mine ores without interference from the grantor. The consideration was listed as $200 “paid on all Trees and Minerals removed from his property.” However, the grantee, his heirs and assigns, were to pay all taxes levied after the deed and the land was to be “in quiet, peaceable, and exclusive possession

Issue
Did the deed convey a fee simple interest, or a limited interest in the timber and mining rights, with the fee simple interest retained by the grantor?

Held
The deed conveyed a fee simple interest in the grantee. Affirmed.

Discussion
When reading the deed, consider what the parties might have intended. It does seem clear, given the consideration, that the grantor was granting to the grantee the timber and mining rights upon the land. However, the remaining language of the deed, particularly the language in the conveyance, is quite ambiguous. Without any reference to extrinsic or parol evidence of the intent of the parties, the Court relied on the language of the conveyance itself, rather than the probability of the basis of the deal.

