Citation
914 S.W.2d 378

Brief Fact Summary
Joe and Tracy Copeland (Plaintiffs) appeal from an adverse judgment entered pursuant to a jury verdict in their damage suit against Amy Nelson (Defendant) for her alleged negligent operation of an automobile. Defendant passed away after trial due to causes unrelated to the collision. A defendant ad litem, John Compton, took her place on appeal.<span class="heading">Synopsis of Rule of Law.</span> An appellate court interferes with a jury verdict only if there is a complete absence of probative facts to support a jury verdict. The reason for this rule is that the plaintiff bears the burden to prove that the defendant was negligent and that plaintiff’s injuries directly resulted from the defendant’s negligence. The sufficiency of the evidence to support a defendant’s verdict is not a question amenable to appellate review. In any action for negligence, the plaintiff must establish that (1) the defendant had a duty to the plaintiff; (2) the defendant failed to perform that duty; and (3) the defendant’s breach was the proximate cause of the plaintiff’s injury. Liability is the conclusion when there is a duty, breach, and causal connection between the conduct of the defendant and the resulting injury to the plaintiff. The third element is frequently referred to as “actual damages”. The plaintiff, who proves that the defendant’s conduct was negligent but fai

Facts
On April 26, 1993, automobiles operated by Mr. Copeland and Defendant collided with each other on the streets of Springfield, Missouri. Mr. Copeland was traveling along Sunshine Street when Defendant, who had been stopped at a stop sign on Woodward Street, attempted to cross Sunshine to reach a supermarket on the other side. Defendant did not see Mr. Copeland when she pulled out and, although he swerved, he was unable to avoid the collision.

Issue
Did the trial court err in denying Plaintiff’s Motion for a New Trial?

Held
The appellate court affirmed the judgment of the trial court holding that it will interfere with a jury verdict only if there is a complete absence of probative facts to support a jury verdict.

Discussion
In any action for negligence, the plaintiff must establish that (1) the defendant had a duty to the plaintiff; (2) the defendant failed to perform that duty; and (3) the defendant’s breach was the proximate cause of the plaintiff’s injury. Liability is the conclusion when there is a duty, breach, and causal connection between the conduct of the defendant and the resulting injury to the plaintiff.

