Citation
828 S.W.2d 681, 1992 Mo.

Brief Fact Summary
The Circuit Court of St. Louis County (Missouri) dismissed appellant’s petition for damages, filed under the wrongful death statute, against respondent health center, doctors, and radiology clinic due to a failure to state a cause of action. Appellant widow sought review

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A causal connection between respondents’ negligence and decedent’s death exists where respondent’s negligence deprives decedent of a chance of recovery.

Facts
Mr. Wollen died from gastric cancer. In this suit, his widow claims that the defendants involved in medical treatment negligently failed to diagnose or test and that had they correctly tested or treated, Mr. Wollen would have had a 30% chance of survival and cure. Appellant widow filed a wrongful death action against respondent health center, doctors, and radiology clinic. Respondents each filed a motion to dismiss the action on the ground that the petition failed to plead a causal connection between respondents’ negligence and decedent’s death.

Issue
Did the trial court err in ruling in favor of the health center, doctors, and radiology clinic?

Held
Yes. The Missouri Supreme Court vacated the lower court’s decision dismissing the petition filed by appellant decedent’s widow for damages filed under the wrongful death statute in favor of respondent health center, doctors, and radiology clinic. The court remanded, holding that the alleged facts would support an action for lost chance of recovery.

Discussion
The standard of review in professional negligence cases differs slightly. Because professionals such as doctors, lawyers, engineers or accountants have specialized skills and training courts rely on the expertise of the profession to determine the appropriate standard of care. In professional negligence the defendant’s compliance with the custom of the profession is determinative; where the defendant comports herself in a manner consistent with the standards of her profession, she is shielded from negligence liability.

