Citation
22 Ill.489 F.2d 1396 (5th Cir. 1974)

Brief Fact Summary
Plaintiffs, one being a citizen of France and the other originally from Mississippi, were married in Mississippi. Plaintiffs moved to Illinois and then returned to Louisiana to allow Plaintiff to finish school. Plaintiffs sued Defendant in federal court in Louisiana and Defendant argued the federal court did not have jurisdiction because one Plaintiff and Defendant were both citizens of Louisiana.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
In order to be a “citizen” of a state for purposes of diversity jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. Section: 1332, an individual must be domiciled in that state. An individual must reside in the state with the intent to remain within the state in order to be considered a domiciliary of the state. Citizenship is determined at the time the complaint is filed.

Facts
Jean Paul Mas, a citizen of France, and Judy Mas, the Plaintiffs, were a married couple. Judy was from Mississippi. The Mas’ were living in Illinois and intended to return to Louisiana, where they had lived before, to allow Judy to finish school. At this time, Plaintiffs sued Perry, Defendant and a citizen of Louisiana, in Federal Court. At the close of Defendant’s case at trail, Defendant made an oral motion to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction, claiming Judy Mas was a citizen of Louisiana. The motion was denied and judgment was entered against Defendant. Defendant appealed.

Issue
Does diversity of citizenship exist where Plaintiff Judy Mas was residing in as a student in Louisiana and consequently had no “intention” to remain there?

Held
Yes.

Discussion
The Court’s opinion holds that the individual’s state of residence is not necessarily their state of citizenship for purposes of diversity of citizenship. If facts exist showing that an individual does not intend to remain indefinitely in a state, such as Plaintiff’s status as a student here, then the plaintiff is not considered a “citizen” of that state.

