Brief Fact Summary
Belgium’s (D) international arrest warrant against the Democratic Republic of Congo’s (D.R.C.) (P) foreign minister was contended by the D.R.C. (P) on the ground that the arrest contravened international law by purporting to exercise jurisdiction over another state’s foreign minister and an order of provisional measures of protection on the ground that the warrant effectively prevented the foreign minister from leaving the D.R.C. (P) was sought by the defendant

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Where a foreign minister is suspected of humanitarian violations, such a minister enjoys full immunity from criminal jurisdiction in another state’s court.

Facts
The Belgian law provides for universal jurisdiction in the case of grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions, crimes against humanity and other serious offenses. Relying on this law, a Belgian judge issued an international arrest warrant for the foreign minister of the D.R.C (P) on the premise of grave violations of humanitarian laws to be tried in Belgium. The Belgium law also denotes that any immunity which is conferred by an individual’s official capacity does not curtail the application of universal jurisdiction.

Issue
Where a foreign minister is suspected of humanitarian violations, does such a minister enjoy full immunity from criminal jurisdiction in another state’s court?

Held
(Judge not identified in casebook excerpt) Yes. Where a foreign minister is suspected of humanitarian violations and even war crimes, such a minister enjoys full immunity from criminal jurisdiction in another state’s court. Acting as the state’s representative in international meeting and negotiations, travelling internationally and overseeing the smooth running of the state’s diplomatic activities are duties which a foreign minister performs. The foreign minister also has the power to bind the state in the course of his duties and he must be in constant communication with his state and its diplomatic missions around the world as well as with representatives of other states. Hence, because of the office he holds and not because of his person, a minister is recognized under international law as a representative of the state.

Discussion
The tenability of the claim of universal jurisdiction by domestic courts was not decided in this case although some of the judges in a separate opinion expressed the belief that universal jurisdiction is allowed in the cases of those offenses considered the most heinous by the international community, so that the warrant for the arrest of the plaintiffs foreign minister did not as such contravene international law.

