Citation
541 U.S. 677 (2004)

Brief Fact Summary
The United States federal courts hearing of an action brought by Altmann (P) was strongly contended by Austria (D) on the premise that the United States federal courts did not have the jurisdiction to entertain the case. Austria also claimed that the displayed art in an Austrian Museum which was highly valuable was obtained unlawfully during and after the World War II and that the art rightly belonged to her.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Claims which relies on conduct that occurred prior to the enactment of the FSIA and prior to the United States adoption of the “restrictive theory” of sovereign immunity in 1952 is applicable to the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 1976.

Facts
Altmann (P) brought suit against Austria (D) and the Austrian Gallery (Gallery) (D) when she learnt that certain valuable art works which belonged to her uncle and was seized or expropriated by Austria (D) after World War II. This suit was filed in a federal district court to recover the arts which consisted of six paintings by Gustav Klimt. She also based her ownership of the painting on the premise that her uncle had willed the paintings to her before he fled Austria.

Issue
Are claims which rely on conduct that occurred prior to the enactment of the FSIA and prior to the United States adoption of the “restrictive theory” of sovereign immunity in 1952 applicable to the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 1976?

Held
(Stevens, J) Yes. Claims which relies on conduct that occurred prior to the enactment of the FSIA and prior to the United States adoption of the “restrictive theory” of sovereign immunity in 1952, is applicable to the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 1976.  Foreign sovereign immunity is not constitutionally required but it is a matter of grace and comity.

Discussion
Immunity is recogniszed under the “restrictive theory” with regards to a foreign state’s sovereign or public acts (jure imperii), but not its private acts (jure gestioris). The classical or absolute theory of sovereign immunity is “restricted”, which implies that a sovereign cannot without his consent, be made a respondent in the courts of another sovereign.

