Brief Fact Summary
When New YORK City (City) (P) sought declaratory judgments for tax liens it had on buildings owned by India (D) and Mongolia (D) which were valid to the extent the building were used to accommodate diplomatic employees, India (D)and Mongolia (D) contended that they were immune under the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act from New York City’s suit.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A foreign government is not immunized from a lawsuit to declare the validity of tax liens on property held by the sovereign for the purpose of accommodating its employees as stated under the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 1976 (FSIA).

Facts
Part of the buildings owned by Mongolia (D) and India (D) in New York City (City) (P) were used to accommodate its lower-level diplomatic employees. The New York law stipulates that real property owned and used exclusively by foreign government ambassadors or ministers plenipotentiary to the United Nations, is exempt from taxation.

Issue
Is a foreign government immunized from a lawsuit to declare the validity of tax liens on property held by the sovereign for the purpose of accommodating its employees as stated under the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 1976 (FSIA)?

Held
(Thomas, J.) No. A foreign government is not immunized from a lawsuit to declare the validity of tax liens on property held by the sovereign for the purpose of accommodating its employees as stated under the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 1976. A foreign state is presumed to be immune from suits as stipulated under the FSIA unless a specific exception applies. The statute’s text is the court’s starting point in determining the immovable property exception scope.

Dissent
(Stevens, J). the validity of the City’s (P) lien is not what this particular case is all about. The case is primarily concerned about a foreign sovereign’s tax liability. Congress could well have said as much if it had intended to waive sovereign immunity in tax litigation.

Discussion
Both defendants would have still be immunized against any form of foreclosure even if the tax lien in this case was declared valid. However, once a court has declared property tax liens valid, foreign sovereigns would traditionally concede and pay. This is one benefit which the City (P) would have gained for having the liens validated. If per adventure the sovereign did not obey the court to pay, such a sovereign would have experienced a reduction in foreign aid been extended to it by the United States by 110 percent of the outstanding debt, and this would make liens enforceable against subsequent purchasers.

