Citation
403 U.S. 713 (1971)

Brief Fact Summary
The Government sought an injunction on the New York Times and the Washington Post to refrain from publishing the Pentagon Papers

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The Court presumes any system of beforehand control laid on expression coming for judgment before it to be constitutionally invalid.

Facts
The U.S. Government (P) sought an injunction by the Court restraining the New York Times (D) and the Washington Post (D) from publishing a classified document on the “History of U.S. Decision-Making Process on Vietnam Policy” (also called The Pentagon Papers). The actions for temporary restraint and injunction were appealed through two district courts and two appellate courts. The Supreme Court granted a review of the material evidence.

Issue
To seek a restraint on expression prior to the occurrence, is a heavy burden of evidence necessary to justify the placing of the restraint?

Held
(Per curiam) Yes. Any proposal for placing restraint on expression prior to the occurrence requires a heavy burden of proof justifying the restraint. The Court views all such with a heavy presumption against their constitutional validity. Since this burden was not met by the United States, the earlier verdict refusing injunctive relief is affirmed.

Dissent
(Harlan, J.) The principle that prior restraint is generally unconstitutional does not deprive the courts of the power to maintain the situation as it is till it can take responsible action. The separation of powers means that there is a restriction on the power of the court to decide upon the activities of the executive arm of government. If the judiciary has the right to disagree with and overrule the executive perception of the risk of negative consequences on national security in the event of disclosure, even then the field afforded for review is restricted. In this case, the court has not shown deference due even to an administrative branch, much less one which is equal to itself in government.

Concurrence
(Black, J.) At first presentation the cases deserved dismissal and denial of relief. The continuance of the injunctive restraint on the freedom of expression of the newspapers is an open and unjustifiable violation of First Amendment rights. If the Court were to conclude that the President does indeed have power by virtue of his office to prevent news from being published by moving court, the First Amendment would be rendered null and void.

Discussion
On June 13, 1971, the New York Times started to publish some extracts from The Pentagon Papers. On June 18, the Washington Post also followed suit. The government brought action to restrain the newspapers from publication. From June 15 to June 28 the case for prior restraint was considered in two district courts and two appellate courts. On June 25 the Supreme Court granted review, and allowed restraining orders to continue till the judgment was made, which occurred on June 30. Justices Brennan, Marshall, Douglas and Black dissented from the decision to grant review, their view being that summary action was appropriate and that on their part they would not continue the ban on publication by the newspape

