Citation
510 U.S. 1309; 114 S. Ct. 909,127 L. Ed. 2d 352,1994 U.S.

Brief Fact Summary
Although the other challenged provisions of the Act were upheld, the provision in the Pennsylvania Abortion Control Act of 1982 requiring a married woman, except in limited circumstances, to notify her husband before having an abortion was held unconstitutional.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The Supreme Court of the United States rejected the trimester framework of Roe v. Wade and employed a new “undue burden” test that invalidates a provision of a law if its purpose or effect is to place a substantial obstacle in the path of a woman seeking an abortion before the fetus attains viability.

Facts
The Pennsylvania Abortion Control Act of 1982 contained certain provisions that were challenged as being unconstitutional. First, the Act requires that a woman seeking an abortion give her informed consent prior to the abortion procedure and specifies that she be provided with certain information at least 24 hours before the abortion is performed. Second, the Act requires a minor obtain parental consent, but provides for a judicial bypass. Third, the Act requires that, unless certain exceptions apply, a married woman seeking an abortion must sign a statement indicating that she has notified her husband of her intended abortion. Finally, the Act imposes reporting requirements on facilities that provide abortion services. The Act exempts these conditions in the event of a “medical emergency.” Before these provisions took effect, Petitioner, Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania, brought this suit seeking declaratory and injunctive relief. Each provision was challenged

Issue
Whether the provision requiring that a woman seeking an abortion give her informed consent prior to the abortion procedure and specifies that she be provided with certain information at least twenty-four hours before the abortion is performed is constitutional.

Held
Yes. Judgment of the Court of Appeals affirmed. Applying the undue burden test, the Court found that there was no evidence on the record showing that requiring a doctor to give information as provided by the statute, would amount to a substantial obstacle to a woman seeking an abortion. Therefore, no undue burden exists and the provision is constitutional.

Dissent
Roe v. Wade was wrongly decided and should be overruled. Each of the challenged provisions is constitutional because the state may regulate abortion procedures in ways rationally related to a legitimate state interest.

Discussion
The Court maintained the Roe v. Wade viability concept to use when determining when a state may regulate a woman’s pregnancy. However, by adopting the new undue burden test in this case, the Court made it more difficult to establish that a law unduly burdens the right to choose an abortion than it was under Roe v. Wade.

