Citation
410 U.S. 959; 93 S. Ct. 1409;35 L. Ed. 2d 694; 1973 U.S.

Brief Fact Summary
A Texas law criminalizing abortion except where the procedure is necessary to “save the life of the mother” and without regard to the state of pregnancy was found by the Supreme Court of the United States to violate due process.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The right of privacy protects a married or unmarried woman’s liberty to choose an abortion, but this right must be considered against important state interests in regulation such as the stage of the pregnancy.

Facts
A Texas law criminalized the procurement of an abortion except by “medical advice for the purpose of saving the life of the mother.” The challengers are a single pregnant woman, Ms. Roe, a childless couple, the wife not pregnant, Mr. and Mrs. Doe, and a licensed physician, Dr. Hallford. Suits by Ms. Roe and the Doe’s were class actions. The three-judge district court ruled the Doe’s complaint non-justiciable, but granted declaratory relief to Appellants Ms. Roe and Dr. Hallford, holding the law unconstitutional.

Issue
Whether the Texas statute improperly invades the right of a pregnant woman to choose to terminate her pregnancy.

Held
Yes. The three-judge district court judgment affirmed. The Constitution does not explicitly mention any right of privacy. However, the Court has recognized that a right of personal privacy does exist under the Constitution. This right of privacy, whether found in the Fourteenth Amendment’s concept of personal liberty as this Court feels it is, or as the District Court determined, in the Ninth Amendment, is broad enough to encompass a woman’s decision whether or not to terminate her pregnancy. The detriment that the state would impose upon the pregnant woman by denying this choice altogether is apparent. She could suffer from medical harm, a distressful life and future, psychological harm, thereby making the unwanted child suffer as well. This right of privacy is not absolute, however. The state may regulate such fundamental rights if that regulation is justified by a “compelling state interest” and is narrowly drawn to express only the legitimate state interests at stake.

Dissent
The drafters did not intend to have the Fourteenth Amendment withdraw from the states the power to legislate with respect to abortion. There is not a right of privacy involved in this case.

Discussion
This monumental case roots the right of privacy it protects in the liberty clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. The woman’s right of privacy can only be defeated by a “compelling state interest” such as protecting the woman’s health and protecting the potentiality of life.

