Citation
159 Tex. Crim. 187, 261 S.W.2d 339, 1953 Tex. Crim. App.

Brief Fact Summary
The Appellant, Clark (the “Appellant”), was convicted of murder and sentenced to death for shooting his ex-wife with a .38 caliber revolver.  The victim was killed in her bed at home.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Evidence relevant to an issue may be admissible over attorney client privilege even if it was obtained through eavesdropping by a third party.

Facts
The Appellant was convicted of murdering his ex-wife and sentenced to death.  The deceased was killed by a gunshot wound from a .38 revolver at home in her bed.  The Appellant’s former step-daughter testified that she awoke the night of the murder and saw the Appellant standing by her bed.  He asked her for help in persuading her mother to come back to him, and she saw that he was carrying a pistol.  Tomas Menchaca (”Mr. Menchaca”) testified that he was with the Appellant throughout the night of the murder.  Mr. Menchaca’s testimony showed that the Appellant did visit the deceased’s home and that he was carrying pistols throughout the night.  He also identified the knife found in the deceased’s home as belonging to the Appellant.  A telephone operator in the City of San Angelo testified that she overheard a phone conversation between the Appellant and his lawyer.  During the conversation, the Appellant stated “Well, I killed her.”  The Appellant testified that he did not remem

Issue
Did the court err in admitting the testimony of the telephone operator because the conversation she overheard was attorney-client privileged?

Held
Judge Morrison issued the opinion for the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals in holding that the trial court properly admitted the evidence of the telephone operator.

Discussion
The conversation between the Appellant and his attorney was not in the usual course of preparing a legal defense.  The Appellant was not seeking legitimate advice worthy of protection under the facts in this case.

