Citation
22 Ill.26 Wis. 2d 683, 133 N.W.2d 267 (1965)

Brief Fact Summary
The Plaintiff, Hoffman (Plaintiff), entered into negotiations with the Defendant, Red Owl Stores, Inc., (Defendant) to enter into a franchise agreement. In anticipation of opening a new Red Owl Store, Plaintiff sold his business, moved his family and underwent several ventures to “familiarize himself” with the grocery business. Defendant changed the terms of the deal on several occasions, eventually expressing to Plaintiff that more consideration and additional terms were needed, outside of the scope of their original agreement. When Plaintiff could not meet Defendants terms, the deal was broken and Plaintiff brought suit for its reliance damages.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
While promissory estoppel is the appropriate remedy in reliance cases, an injured party will only be awarded damages to the extent they have been displaced.

Facts
In 1959 Plaintiff, the owner/operator of a bakery contacted Defendant with the idea of establishing a Red Owl franchise in his city, Wautoma. In anticipation of an agreement with Defendant, Plaintiff bought a small grocery store in Wautoma and operated it so that he could learn the grocery business. After Defendant saw that Plaintiff was profiting, it suggested that he would have to move, because their stores were located in larger cities. Plaintiff, at that time, sold his bakery, and the Wautoma store, moved his family to Cilton and put a down-payment on a lot for the Red Owl store. Throughout the course of dealing, Plaintiff made it clear to Defendant that he could not afford more than an $18,000.00 capital investment. While Plaintiff was initially assured this would be adequate, before the closing of negotiations, Defendant told Plaintiff he would have to come up with $26,000.00, in order for the deal to go through. Plaintiff involved his father-in-law in the investment pro

Issue
The issue in this case is whether the facts support a finding that promissory estoppel should be used to allow Plaintiff to recover his reliance damages.

Held
Affirmed.

Discussion
The contract remedy used in this case is generally limited to the measure of reliance. Reliance, again, is only the amount a party has displaced itself, in anticipation of an agreement. Thus, reliance damages only serve to put the party back into the position they would have formerly been in.

