Citation
878 F.2d 1445

Brief Fact Summary
The Defendant, Oliver (Defendant), began negotiations with the Plaintiff, Southworth (Plaintiff) and a third party. When negotiations became complicated the Defendant rescinded the offer to avoid disagreement. Plaintiff claims the offer was valid and accepted.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
There is a valid offer if a price quotation is addressed to a definite group [this is a change] and includes explicit language such as price, exact location, terms and sale date because a reasonable person would believe that the Seller is making an offer to sell.

Facts
Defendant decided to sell some of their property and some of their Forest Service grazing permits. Defendant stopped by Plaintiff’s house and asked if Plaintiff was interested in buying the property. Plaintiff said yes. Defendant said he thought Plaintiff would be interested in the land and Holliday, a neighbor, would be interested in the permits. Defendant showed a map to Plaintiff showing the land that was for sale. This conversation ended with the understanding that Defendant would develop the value and price and Plaintiff would get the financing arranged for the purchase. Defendant said that he would send information to the Plaintiff about what price he wanted so as to “give him ‘notice’ of ‘what he wanted for the land.’” Defendant called Holliday and Holliday said he was not interested in the land only the permits. Plaintiff called Defendant almost a month later to ask if Defendant still planned to sell. Defendant said yes, he had some delays, but he would soon have infor

Issue
Was Defendant’s letter to Plaintiff an offer for sale?

Held
Yes. Affirmed.

Discussion
Murray on Contracts states: “The most important of the remaining guides is the language used. If there are no words of promise, undertaking or commitment, the tendency is to construe the expression to be an invitation for an offer or mere preliminary negotiations in the absence of strong, countervailing circumstances.”

