Citation
121 R.I. 254, 399 A.2d 469,1979 R.I. 1787, 9 A.L.R.4th 511.

Brief Fact Summary
The various tests for insanity are discussed.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Under the now-adopted Model Penal Code test, a defendant is relieved of responsibility for his criminal actions under two circumstances: (1) when, as a result of mental disease or defect, the defendant lacked substantial capacity to appreciate the criminality of his conduct and (2) when, as a result of mental disease or defect, the defendant lacked substantial capacity to conform his conduct to the requirements of law.

Facts
The Supreme Court of Rhode Island sets forth a history of the tests for insanity including: the M’Naghten Rule, the Irresistible Impulse Test, the Durham or “Product” Test, and the Model Penal Code Test.

Issue
Should the Rhode Island Supreme Court abandon the M’Naghten test in favor of a new standard for determining criminal responsibility of those who claim they are blameless by reason of mental illness?

Held
Yes. The M’Naghten Rule states that the defendant is presumed sane unless he clearly proves that, at the time of the offense, he was laboring under such a defect of reason from a disease of the mind (1) so as not to know the nature and quality of the act or (2) so as not to know the act was wrong. In response to the criticism that the M’Naghten Rule is too narrow, some states supplemented it with the Irresistible Impulse Test. Under the Irresistible Impulse Test, the M’Naghten standards are applied and then the relevant inquiry turns to: even if the defendant knew right from wrong, he is insane if (1) he is unable to control his behavior or (2) he has lost the power to choose. This test has also been widely criticized as excluding types of behavior that should not be excluded. Thereafter, the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia diverged from the M’Naghten Rule and created the Durham or “Product” Test. Under this test, “an accused is not criminally responsible if his u

Discussion
It is important to understand all tests explicated in this opinion even though the majority of the states utilize either the M’Naghten Rule or the Model Penal Code Test.

