Citation
409 Mass. 867, 570 N.E.2d 992, 1991 Mass.

Brief Fact Summary
Jonathan Stockhammer (Defendant) was convicted of rape and assault with intent to commit rape, following a sexual incident with a woman (Complainant).  At trial, Defendant sought disclosure of various records relating to Complainant’s evaluation by psychiatrists and counselors, but the court did not allow such disclosure; the court also disallowed Defendant from questioning Complainant about her sexual activity.  Defendant appeals his conviction here.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A criminal defendant on trial for rape and assault with intent to rape is permitted to cross-examine a complainant with respect to her past sexual relationships when the defendant asserts a defense of consent, the credibility of the complainant is at issue, and when the cross-examination is designed to uncover evidence that the complainant is biased and motivated to lie.  Also, such a criminal defendant is entitled to view records of the complainant’s hospital and psychiatric treatment in order to pursue evidence of the complainant’s bias, prejudice or motive to lie.

Facts
Defendant and Complainant, at the time of the alleged rape, were both college freshmen, and friends.  After spending a day with her boyfriend from out of town, Complainant and Defendant went to dinner together.  Following dinner, Complainant and Defendant claim different events transpired.  Complainant claimed that she and Defendant were alone in her room, and that she drank some alcohol; she asserted that Defendant did not drink any alcohol on the night in question.  Complainant claimed that Defendant made sexual advances at her, but that she rejected the advances.  Complainant then claims Defendant held her down and forced her to have sexual intercourse with her.

Issues
Did the lower court error in ruling that Defendant could not question Complainant about her sexual history with her boyfriend to establish the existence of any consent, bias, and/or motive to testify falsely? Did the lower court error in ruling that Defendant could not review the records from Complainant’s hospital and psychiatric treatment in order to search for evidence of Complainant’s bias, prejudice or motive to lie?

Held
Reversed and remanded.

Discussion
The court addressed each issue separately.

