Citation
412 F.3d 133 (D.C. Cir. 2005)

Brief Fact Summary
It was argued by the Chamber of Commerce of the United States (Chamber) (Plaintiff) that the SEC (Defendant) was lacking authority as per the ICA to publish a rule regulating the corporate governance of mutual funds and that the rule was enacted by the SEC while failing to conform to the conditions of the Administrative Procedure Act (APA).

Synopsis of Rule of Law
(1) In a rule issued by a federal agency that affect its capacity to invest in mutual funds unrestrained by the conditions, a mutual fund investor has standing to petition for review of conditions.

Facts
A rule was enacted under the ICA by the SEC that, in order to participate in sales that are banned by the ICA, required an investment company (mutual fund) to have a board with at least 75% independent directors and an independent chairman. A review of the rule was petitioned by the Chamber of Commerce of the United States (Chamber) contending that authority was never given to the SEC by the ICA to regulate “corporate governance” and regardless, the rule was promulgated by the SEC without conforming to the conditions of the APA. The Chamber insisted it had standing for two reasons; it was an investor and some of its members would be affected by the rule because they were mutual fund advisers. The rule was implemented by the SEC in hopes of shrinking conflicts of interest between mutual fund shareholders and advisers. A mutual fund is defined as a pool of assets that belong to individual investors holding shares in the fund, is run by an “investment company” and the board of directors is elected by shareholders. The management role in charge of the fund is usually delegated to an “adviser”, which is a company not affiliated with the fund that may have conflicting interests than those of the shareholders, even though the board is authorized to operate the fund. Even though funds that participate in specific transactions where the adviser could gain at the shareholders expense are banned by the ICA, pursuant to the SEC’s long-standing Exemptive Rules a fund that satiates specific requirements is permitted to participate in transactions that are otherwise banned. Adopting the corporate governance requirements that it promulgated would aide in the reduction of abuses, the SEC determined, seeing as requirements would grow the independent judgment and analysis of directors by increasing the percentage of independent directors. The SEC found the independent directors vital to keeping the natural conflicts betwixt the mutual fund shareholders and advisers in check and justified the independent chairman requirement on the ground that a “a fund board is in a better position to protect the interests of the fund, and to fulfill the board's obligations under the Act and the Exemptive Rules, when its chairman does not have the conflicts of interest inherent in the role of an executive of the fund adviser." The dissenters alleged that current statutory and regulatory controls were sufficient and that these new requirements would up the costs for shareholders. The court of appeals granted review.

Issue
(1) In a rule issued by a federal agency that affects its capacity to invest in mutual funds unrestrained by the conditions, does a mutual fund investor has standing to petition for review of conditions?

Held
(Ginsburg, J.) (1) Yes. In a rule issued by a federal agency that affect its capacity to invest in mutual funds unrestrained by the conditions, a mutual fund investor has standing to petition for review of conditions. A party must demonstrate that is has been injured-in-fact to have standing and a judgment will compensate the injury. In this case, the Chamber purports to have been injured by the two contested requirements due to it wanting to invest in shares of funds that have the possibility of participating in transactions regulated by the Exemptive Rules but the funds in question fail to meet the requirements. Currently investing in funds, with no plans of ceasing, the Chamber would like to invest in funds unrestricted by conditions with the SEC’s retort being that there is no proof that the sort of fund the Chamber wishes to invest in would achieve more than a conforming to the two corporate governance conditions fund would. Regardless, the consumers incapacity to purchase a desired product has been held to establish injury-in-fact, even if through buying an alternative product the injury could be rectified. So, as per this precedent, an injury-in-fact has been suffered by the Chamber and as a result of a favorable ruling being able to redress that injury, the Chamber has standing to sue the SEC.

Discussion
The APA has four simple purposes: (1) to necessitate agencies to make certain the public is privy to their organization, rules and procedures; (2) to offer for public involvement in the rulemaking process; (3) to createuniform standards for the action of formal rulemaking and adjudication; and (4) to clarify the scope of judicial review.Applicable to both federal executive departments and independent agencies, the APA has been referred to as "a bill of rights for the hundreds of thousands of Americans whose affairs are controlled or regulated" by federal government agencies. The APA can considerably affect the rule-making procedure of the SEC and can be invoked by associations, individuals and other entities, as witnessed in this case.

