Citation
681 A.2d 1026 (Del. 1996)

Brief Fact Summary
Thomas & Betts Corporation, (Appellant), appeals the Court of Chancery holding granting in part and denying in part its request for inspection of certain books and records of Leviton Manufacturing Co., Inc., (Appellee).

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Where substantial evidence supports a finding that plaintiff’s primary motives for the inspection are improper, plaintiff has a greater-than-normal evidentiary burden to adduce evidence from which a credible possibility of mismanagement and waste may be inferred and to adduce specific evidence of waste and mismanagement.

Facts
Appellee is a closely held corporation. Appellant is a publicly traded business that was interested in either acquiring or engaging in some sort of joint venture with Appellee. Appellee was not interested in either. Appellant decided to seek a minority position in Appellee to force a sale of the company. Appellant purchased Thomas Blumberg’s 29.1% share of Appellee and promised to pay Blumberg more should Appellant acquire Appellee.

Issue
Whether the Plaintiff has a greater than normal evidentiary burden to adduce evidence from which a credible possibility of mismanagement and waste may be inferred and to adduce specific evidence of waste and mismanagement. Whether the Court of Chancery abused its discretion in limiting the scope of its inspection of Appellee’s books and records.

Held
Yes. When substantial evidence supports a finding that Plaintiff’s primary motives for the inspection are improper, Plaintiff bears a greater than normal evidentiary burden. No. The Trial Court has wide latitude to determine the scope of inspection.

Discussion
The Court of Chancery, after reviewing the evidence and testimony at trial, found that Appellant’s primary purpose in demanding the inspection was to acquire Appellee. This is not a case of a stockholder seeking to protect his or her investment. Appellant purchased its interest in Appellee with the express purpose of acquiring the company, attempted to do so amicably, and then resorted to this litigation. Appellant failed to provide this Court with a reason to revisit those factual determinations. Appellant bears the burden of proving that each category of books and records is essential to accomplishment of the stockholder’s articulated purpose for the inspection. The trial court has wide latitude to prescribe any limitations on conditions with reference to the inspection. The rights of the corporation must be harmonized with those of the inspecting stockholder. Here, Appellee did not meet its burden with some of the books and records.

