Citation
883 S.W.2d 947,1994 Mo. App.

Brief Fact Summary
Plaintiff testified that her attorney failed to adequately investigate in a divorce settlement and negligently encouraged her to settle.  Plaintiff brought a malpractice suit against the attorney and his law partners.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The desire for the peaceful resolution of marriage dissolution cases and the policy against revisiting settled cases is not sufficient to disallow a malpractice action in a divorce settlement where the attorney was negligent.

Facts
Plaintiff retained defendant Lacks to represent her in the dissolution of her marriage to Kenneth Baldridge.  Plaintiff testified that Lacks told her that Baldridge was attempting to prove his entire net worth was composed of non-marital assets because it was attributable to the original million dollars he had prior to the marriage.  She testified Lacks advised her to settle because if Baldridge were successful, or if the postnuptial agreement was found valid, she could walk away with nothing.  Lacks negotiated a settlement with Baldridge’s attorneys, then advised plaintiff that her options were to risk receiving nothing or to settle.  Prior to a hearing for temporary support, Lacks allegedly informed plaintiff that Baldridge had offered one million dollars and a condominium in Florida, and that she should take the offer and run.  A dissolution hearing was held during which an oral agreement was dictated into the record and plaintiff testified that she understood the property

Issue
Did the trial court err in denying defendant’s motion for a directed verdict because litigants should not be allowed to file malpractice lawsuits which challenge the adequacy of previous settlements?

Held
Attorneys are not granted immunity from civil liability cases such as this where the clients have settled, even without a showing of affirmative misrepresentation or fraud by the attorney.

Discussion
The court acknowledged the public policy argument for the peaceful settlement of disputes and that settled cases should not be readily revisited.  Nonetheless, the court did not find that such a policy disallowed malpractice suits under such facts when a showing of negligence is made based upon common law civil liability.

