Citation
436 U.S. 84,98 S. Ct. 1690,56 L. Ed. 2d 132,1978 U.S.

Brief Fact Summary
Appellee separated from appellant and moved to California.  After their children joined her in California, appellee attempted to bring a divorce suit in California against appellant, who still resided in New York.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
In order to establish personal jurisdiction a defendant must have certain minimum contacts with the forum State so as not to offend traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice.

Facts
Appellant Ezra Kulko married appellee Sharon Kulko Horn in 1959 during appellant’s three-day stopover in California en route from a military base in Texas to a tour of duty in Korea.  At the time both parties were domiciled in and residents of New York.  Appellee immediately returned to New York after the marriage, as did appellant after his tour of duty.  The two lived in New York for 13 years and then separated.  Appellant remained in New York with their children, while appellee moved to California.  She briefly returned to sign a separation agreement providing the children would live in New York.  Immediately afterward appellee flew to Haiti and procured a divorce incorporating the terms of the agreement.  In 1973 appellant’s daughter told her father that she wanted to remain in California after her Christmas vacation.  Appellant bought her a one-way ticket.  In 1976 appellant’s other child called his mother and told her he wanted to live with her in California.  She sent h

Issue
Did appellant have sufficient minimum contacts with California to allow California to assert personal jurisdiction over him in this matter?

Held
Appellant’s act of permitting his daughter to spend more time in California did not amount to his purposefully availing himself of the benefits and protections of California’s laws so as to permit California to assert personal jurisdiction.

Discussion
The Court found that the single act of permitting his daughter to spend more time in California than required under a separation agreement was insufficient to establish the minimum contacts with California such that it would not offend traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice to assert personal jurisdiction over appellant.

