Citation
791 S.W.2d 772,1990 Mo. App.

Brief Fact Summary
Appellant, husband, and plaintiff, wife, led a marriage in which plaintiff provide for financial stability and husband only provided limited domestic work.  Appellant challenged the trial court’s division of marital property and failure to award maintenance upon divorce.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The sex of the parties should have no effect on the division of marital property and allowance of maintenance.

Facts
Appellant, husband, and respondent, wife, were married in 1972 and separated in 1987.  In 1972 the parties moved to Arkansas were respondent was going to work for Southwestern Bell Corp. and appellant worked as a reporter for a local newspaper.  Respondent received a promotion and moved to St. Louis, where appellant eventually was fired from Maritz, Inc.  The couple agreed he would not seek outside employment, devoting his time to writing fiction.  Respondent received another promotion and the parties moved to Oklahoma City, where appellant continued to pursue a writing career.  He later abandoned his effort without having written a chapter.  He then worked briefly in a food store and spent 8-9 months working in free-lance public relations.  When not employed, the couple agreed appellant would be responsible for the general upkeep of the house and preparation of dinner.  He spent several hours per day preparing the meal, but respondent claimed that his other domestic chores we

Issue
Did the trial court err in its division of the marital property and failure to award appellant maintenance?

Held
The trial court abused its discretion in dividing the marital property and failing ot award rehabilitative maintenance to appellant.

Dissent
Accepting the concept of marriage as a shared enterprise, this husband had a negative impact on the marriage.  He is unwilling, rather than unable to support himself

Discussion
The majority finds that the sex of the parties should have no effect on the division of marital property and allowance of maintenance regardless of reversed gender roles.  The dissent did not believe that the husband provided sufficient support either financially or domestically.

