Citation
964 P.2d 1242,1998 Wyo.

Brief Fact Summary
Wife brought a divorce decree in Washington where she formerly lived with her husband and child.  Wyoming, the domicile of the husband, refused to honor the decree based on a lack of jurisdiction.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The UIFSA, as adopted by both states requires a state to honor decrees by foreign states so long as the foreign state’s assumption of personal jurisdiction over appellee was consistent with that state’s general laws of jurisdiction as well as the Uniform Interstate Family Support Act.

Facts
In 1985 Sheree Mahoney was born in Casper, Wyoming to Sherrill Mahoney and Benjamin St. John, III (appellee).  Appellee verbally acknowledged fatherhood of Sheree.  In 1986 Sherrill and Sheree relocated to Washington.  In 1992 Sherrill brought a paternity action against appellee, who continued to reside in Casper, in the State of Washington.  Appellee summoned Sherrill back to Casper, where the two were married in 1993.  The couple and their daughter returned to Washington, but nine months later the two separated with appellee returning to Casper.  Sherrill filed a petition for divorce in Washington, achieving personal service upon appellee in Washington.  Appellee chose to default and judgment was entered against him for child support arrearages.  When Washington moved to enforce the obligation pursuant to the Uniform Interstate Family Support Act (UIFSA) appellee contested Washington’s exercise of in personam jurisdiction over a Wyoming resident.  The Wyoming court held that

Issue
Did the Washington court have and exercise good and sufficient personal jurisdiction over appellee at the time the decree and order of support were entered?

Held
Washington’s assumption of personal jurisdiction over appellee was consistent with that state’s general laws of jurisdiction as well as the Uniform Interstate Family Support Act.

Discussion
The Court upholds the purpose of the UIFSA, which is designed to promote consistency and efficiency in multistate support cases

