Citation
249 N.Y. 458, 164 N.E. 545 (1928)

Brief Fact Summary
One partner in a joint venture took advantage of an opportunity that arose from the partnership without informing his partner.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Members of a partnership owed duty of loyalty to each other and so must disclose opportunities that arise in order for both to have an equal chance to take advantage of it.

Facts
Walter J. Salmon (Defendant) entered into a lease for a hotel. Defendant, while in course of treaty with the lessor as to the execution of the lease, was in course of treaty with Meinhard (Plaintiff), for the necessary funds. Plaintiff and Defendant were involved in a joint venture in regards to the property, for better or worse. Defendant was the manager of the property. Near the end of the lease, Elbridge Gerry became the owner of the reversion, and he approached Defendant. The tow entered into a new lease, which is owned and controlled by Defendant. Defendant did not tell Plaintiff about it. When Plaintiff found out about the new lease, he demanded that the lease be held in trust as an asset of the venture between Defendant and Plaintiff, which Defendant refused.

Issue
When a partner appropriates the benefit of the partnership without making any disclosure to the other partner, will that act be a breach of loyalty?

Held
Yes.

Dissent
The issue here is whether the transaction was unfair and inequitable. There was no general partnership, merely a joint venture for a limited object, to end at a fixed time. The design was to exploit a particular lease. The interest terminated when the joint adventure terminated.

Discussion
Partners in a venture have a fiduciary duty to each other. So, when an opportunity arises that can benefit both partners, but one partner takes advantage of it without informing the other, the fiduciary duty is deemed to have been breached. The opportunity belonged to the partnership, not to the individual partners, so one partner is considered to have stolen the opportunity from the partnership.

