Citation
517 U.S. 559, 116 S. Ct. 1589, 134 L. Ed. 2d 809 (1996)

Brief Fact Summary
The Respondent, Ira Gore, Jr. (Respondent), purchased a new BMW and later learned that the car had been repainted. In a suit for suppression of a material fact, the Respondent was awarded $2 million in punitive damages. The Petitioner, BMW of North America, Inc. (Petitioner), appeals, claiming the punitive damages award is grossly excessive.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The Due Process Clause of the 14th Amendment of the United States Constitution (Constitution) limits the amount recoverable in punitive damages when the damages constitute grossly excessive punishment for a tortfeasor.

Facts
The Respondent purchased a BMW sports sedan from an authorized BMW dealer in Birmingham, Alabama. After approximately nine months, Respondent took the car to an independent detailer to have the car detailed. The proprietor of the independent detailer detected evidence that the car had been repainted. The repainting was done by BMW to repair acid rain damage that occurred when the car was in transit from Germany. Respondent brought suit against the Petitioner alleging that the failure to disclose the fact that the car had been repainted constituted suppression of a material fact. At trial, Petitioner acknowledged it had adopted a nationwide policy of selling cars as new without advising the dealer that any repairs had been made when the repair cost did not exceed three percent of the suggested retail price. At trial, Respondent introduced evidence that his repainted car was worth less than a car that had not been refinished. In support of a punitive damages claim, he introduced

Issue
Was the $2 million punitive damages award to the purchaser of a refinished car grossly excessive, so as to violate the Due Process Clause of the 14th Amendment of the Constitution?

Held
Yes. Judgment reversed and case remanded.

Dissent
Justice Antonin Scalia’s (J. Scalia) dissent, in which Justice Clarence Thomas (J. Thomas) joined, is omitted. Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg’s (J. Ginsburg) dissent, in which the Chief Justice joined, is omitted.

Discussion
On remand, the Alabama Supreme Court ordered a remittitur of the punitive damages award to $50,000 and Respondent accepted.

