Citation
73 N.Y.2d 246, 536 N.E.2d 372, 538 N.Y.S.2d 937, 1989 N.Y.

Brief Fact Summary
McDougald (Plaintiff) suffered severe brain damage and was left comatose as a result of Defendants’ negligence in a medical operation. Plaintiff sued Defendants for malpractice and received a jury award of $9,650,102.00. Defendants appeal the amount of the damage award. Liability is not at issue.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Awareness of one’s condition is a prerequisite for recovery of damages for loss of enjoyment of life and these damages are to be considered as part of the damages for pain and suffering.

Facts
Plaintiff underwent a Caesarian section and tubal ligation. She was thirty-years old at the time of this procedure. Garber (Defendant) performed the surgery. Armengol (Defendant) and Kulkarni (Defendant) provided anesthesia. During the surgery, Plaintiff suffered oxygen deprivation, resulting in severe brain damage, which left her in a permanent comatose condition. In an award for malpractice, the jury awarded Plaintiff $9,650,102.00. This included $1 million for conscious pain and suffering and a separate award of $3.5 million for loss of the pleasures and pursuits of life. The balances of the damages were for pecuniary damages, lost earnings and the cost of custodial and nursing care. Plaintiff’s husband was awarded $1.5 million for the loss of his wife’s services. The Trial Judge reduced the total award to $4,796,728.00 by striking the entire award for future nursing care and by reducing the separate awards for conscious pain and suffering and loss of the pleasures and purs

Issue
Is awareness of one’s condition relevant to a jury’s consideration of damages to award a victim for loss of enjoyment of life, and should these damages be considered as part of damages for pain and suffering?

Held
Yes. Judgment for Defendants.

Dissent
(Justice Titone) The loss of enjoyment of life is an objective damage item, conceptually distinct from conscious pain and suffering.

Discussion
There are two intertwined holdings in this case. The first is that cognitive awareness is a prerequisite to recovery for loss of enjoyment of life. The second holding is that if recovery of loss of enjoyment is appropriate, it is included in the award for pain and suffering. Most jurisdictions seem to favor the majority position based on the probability that separating loss of enjoyment of life from pain and suffering would lead to a duplication of damages.

