Citation
536 U.S. 934

Brief Fact Summary
The Appellee, Anderson (Appellee), was sent by the Appellant, Montgomery Ward & Co., Inc. (Appellant), to the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences (UAMS) hospital for treatment, after she fell at Appellant’s store. Appellee reached an agreement with UAMS, discounting her bill by fifty percent. Appellant moved to prohibit Appellee from presenting her total UAMS bill as proof of her medical expenses, Appellee claimed that the collateral source rule would prohibit Appellant from introducing evidence of the discount.<span class="heading">Synopsis of Rule of Law.</span> The collateral source rule prevents the introduction of evidence of payments received by an injured party from sources collateral to the wrongdoer.

Facts
The Appellee was injured while shopping at the Appellant’s store. Appellee was sent by Appellant to the UAMS hospital to be treated. Appellee had reached an agreement with UAMS that UAMS would discount her bill by fifty percent. Appellant moved in limine to prohibit appellee from presenting the total amount billed by UAMS as proof of her medical expenses, asking that her evidence be limited to the actual amount that she was responsible to pay. Appellee claimed that the collateral source rule would prohibit Appellant from introducing evidence of the discount. The trial court denied the motion in limine.<span class="heading">Issue.</span> Was the trial court correct in determining that the forgiveness of a debt for medical services is a collateral source to be sheltered by the rule?

Held
Yes. Judgment affirmed.

Discussion
The Court pointed out four situations in which the collateral source rule is inapplicable: (1) to rebut plaintiff’s testimony that he was compelled by financial necessity to return to work prematurely or forego additional medical care; (2) to show that the plaintiff had attributed his condition to some other cause, such as sickness; (3) to impeach plaintiff’s testimony that he had paid his medical expenses himself; (4) to show that the plaintiff actually continued to work instead of being out of work.

