Citation
546 F.3d 230

Brief Fact Summary
The Plaintiffs were the driver of a car, Keva Richardson (Richardson) and the passenger, Ann McGregor (McGregor)(Plaintiffs). The car was stuck by a semi-trailer driven by the Defendant, Chapman, an employee of Tandem/Carrier (Defendants). A directed verdict was entered on behalf of Plaintiffs in regard to liability. Defendants appeal the jury’s assessment of damages.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Courts may order a remittitur of damages when a jury’s assessment of damages is excessive based on the evidence.

Facts
While the Plaintiffs were stopped at a traffic light, their car was struck by a semi-trailer driven by Chapman, an employee of Tandem/Carrier. Plaintiff Keva Richardson suffered incomplete quadriplegia as a result of the accident. Plaintiff Ann McGregor suffered a laceration on her forehead which left a slight scar. The trial court directed a verdict in favor of the Plaintiffs on the question of liability. The jury returned verdicts in favor of Richardson and McGregor in the amounts of $22,358,814 and $102,215 respectively. The intermediate court rejected Defendants’ challenges to the amounts of damages.

Issue
Was the intermediate appellate court incorrect in determining that the damages awarded by the jury were excessive?

Held
Yes. Judgment of the appellate court is affirmed in part, reversed in part, and vacated in part.

Dissent
The dissenting judge concurs with the general opinion of the majority, disagreeing only with the majority’s remittitur of Mrs. Richardson’s and Mrs. McGregor’s damages. In regard to Mrs. Richardson, Professor Linke’s calculations represented only Mrs. Richardson’s minimum care needs. The jury should have been allowed to arrive at a higher value based on the evidence. In regard to Mrs. McGregor, the majority’s remittitur of her pain and suffering award is arbitrary. In both instances the majority substituted its own subjective judgment for the jury’s evaluation of the evidence.

Discussion
The majority is hesitant to substitute its’ opinion for that of the trier of fact in determining damages. Because the determination of damages is a question for the trier of fact, the court will only issue a remittitur if the damages shock the judicial conscious.

