Citation
123 S. Ct. 1513 (2003).

Brief Fact Summary
Curtis Campbell (Plaintiff) sued their insurance company, State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co. (Defendant), for bad faith arising out of a settlement negotiation. Plaintiff was awarded $1 million in compensatory damages and $145 million in punitive damages.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Courts reviewing punitive damages consider three guideposts: (1) the degree of reprehensibility of the defendant’s misconduct; (2) the disparity between the actual or potential harm suffered by the plaintiff and the punitive damages award; and (3) the difference between the punitive damages awarded by the jury and the civil penalties authorized or imposed in comparable cases.

Facts
Plaintiff was driving with his wife. He decided to pass six vans traveling ahead of them on a two-lane highway. Todd Ospital (Ospital) was driving a small car approaching from the opposite direction. To avoid a head-on collision, Ospital swerved onto the shoulder, lost control of his automobile, and collided with a vehicle driven by Robert G. Slusher (Slusher). Ospital was killed and Slusher was rendered permanently disabled. A consensus was reached early on by the investigators and witnesses that Plaintiff’s unsafe pass had caused the crash. Defendant, nonetheless decided to contest liability and declined offers by Slusher and Ospital’s estate to settle the claims for the policy limit of $50,000.00 ($25,000.00 per claimant). Defendant ignored the advice of one of its own investigators and took the case to trial, assuring Plaintiffs that “their assets were safe, that they had no liability for the accident, that Defendant would represent their interests, and that they did not n

Issue
Is the award of punitive damages in this case excessive?

Held
Yes. Judgment reversed.

Dissent
There are three dissenting opinions reprinted in the casebook:

Discussion
The majority opinion mentioned the wealth of the Defendant. It is necessary that the jury know the wealth of Defendant because relatively small punitive damage awards do not deter others. As to Defendant, the court needs to issue a large amount of punitive damages in order for it to sting Defendant and deter it from similar ac

