Citation
845 S.W.2d 240, 1992 Tex.

Brief Fact Summary
The Plaintiff, Ms. Smith (Plaintiff), brought claims against multiple defendants for medical malpractice. Plaintiff entered into Mary Carter agreements with several defendants, in which the defendants effectively settled before trial, then participated in the trial as defendants assisting the plaintiff in her suit against the remaining defendant. The remaining defendant challenged the validity of the Mary Carter agreements.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The Texas Supreme Court has voided the validity of Mary Carter agreements based on public policy considerations.

Facts
The Plaintiff suffered serious injuries as a result of an automobile accident and required significant medical attention. She was treated at various times by Dr. Syrquin, Dr. Elbaor, Dr. Stephens and Dr. Gatmaitan. Plaintiff filed medical malpractice claims against the Defendants, all four above doctors, D/FW Medical Center, and Arlington Community Hospital (ACH), (Defendants) due to a fused ankle that resulted from treatment. Prior to trial, Plaintiff settled and dismissed her claim against D/FW Medical Center and non-suited her claim against Dr. Gatmaitan. She also entered into “Mary Carter” settlement agreements with Dr. Syrquin, Dr. Stephens and ACH. The agreements provided that they would pay plaintiff a total of $425,010, remain as defendants, participate in the trial, and be paid back all or a portion of the settlement money out of the recovery against Dr. Elbaor. Dr. Elbaor requested the agreements be voided, or the settling Defendants be dismissed from trial. The tria

Issue
Are Mary Carter agreements void as against public policy?

Held
Yes. Judgment reversed and remanded for new trial.

Dissent
The trial court went to great lengths to ensure that the agreements were not hidden from the jury and did not unduly favor the Plaintiff. As long as two parties to the trial remain antagonistic, the adversarial process should still effectively result in discovery of the truth.

Discussion
The dissent’s opinion represents the majority view in the United States, with most jurisdictions allowing for Mary Carter agreements.

