Citation
462 U.S. 640, 103 S. Ct. 2605, 77 L. Ed. 2d 65 (1983)

Brief Fact Summary
After an individual was arrested, his bag was searched as part of an inventory of his belongings and drugs were found in a cigarette package.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
“[I]t is not ‘unreasonable’ for police, as part of the routine procedure incident to incarcerating an arrested person, to search any container or article in his possession, in accordance with established inventory procedures.”

Facts
The Respondent, Lafayette (the “Respondent”) was arrested for partaking in an altercation with a movie theater manager.  The Respondent was arrested and he had a purse-type shoulder bag with him on the trip to the police station.  While at the station, the Respondent took a pack of cigarettes out of the bag and the officer found drugs in the cigarette package.   The Respondent was charged with violating Illinois’ state drug laws.

Issue
“[W]hether, consistent with the Fourth Amendment, it is reasonable for police to search the personal effects of a person under lawful arrest as part of the routine administrative procedure at a police station house incident to booking and jailing the suspect[?]”

Held
“The justification for such searches does not rest on probable cause, and hence the absence of a warrant is immaterial to the reasonableness of the search. Indeed, we have previously established that the inventory search constitutes a well-defined exception to the warrant requirement.”  Further, “[a]t the station house, it is entirely proper for police to remove and list or inventory property found on the person or in the possession of an arrested person who is to be jailed. A range of governmental interests supports an inventory process. It is not unheard of for persons employed in police activities to steal property taken from arrested persons; similarly, arrested persons have been known to make false claims regarding what was taken from their possession at the station house. A standardized procedure for making a list or inventory as soon as reasonable after reaching the station house not only deters false claims but also inhibits theft or careless handling of articles taken

Discussion
This case reiterates that inventory searches are not violative of the constitution.

