Citation
531 U.S. 326, 121 S. Ct. 946, 148 L. Ed. 2d 838 (2001)

Brief Fact Summary
The police refused to allow an individual to enter his home after being informed by his wife that there was dope in the home.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The restriction at issue was reasonable, and hence lawful based on various circumstances including the fact that the police officers had probable cause to believe that the home contained contraband, the contraband could have been destroyed, and the restraint was “both limited and tailored reasonably to secure law enforcement needs while protecting privacy interests.”

Facts
Tera McArthur (”Ms. McArthur”) had two police officers accompany her to the trailer where she lived.  Ms. McArthur lived with her husband Charles McAarthur (”Mr. McArthur”) and she wanted to remove her belongings.  Mr. McArthur was present at the trailer.  After gathering her belongings, she told the police officers that she saw her husband put some dope under the couch.  One of the officers then asked Mr. McArthur if he could search the trailer.  Mr. McArthur refused to give his consent.  The other officer then went with Ms. McArthur to obtain a warrant.  The officer remaining behind refused to allow Mr. McArthur into the trailer unless he was accompanied by a police officer.  He entered the trailer two or three times while the officer watched.  After a warrant was obtained, both of the officers searched the trailer and found marijuana and certain drug paraphernalia.

Issue
Whether the police violated an individual’s rights when they refused to allow him to enter his home for two hours so as to obtain a search warrant?

Held
No.  The court began by observing that there are certain situations where a warrant is not required.  “When faced with special law enforcement needs, diminished expectations of privacy, minimal intrusions, or the like, the Court has found that certain general, or individual, circumstances may render a warrantless search or seizure reasonable.”

Discussion
It is interesting to read this case alongside [Welsh v. Wisconsin], which distinguished between jailable and non-jailable defenses.

