Citation
469 U.S. 325, 105 S. Ct. 733, 83 L. Ed. 2d 720 (1985)

Brief Fact Summary
The vice-principal of a school searched a students bag and found evidence that she was dealing marijuana.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
“[S]chool officials need not obtain a warrant before searching a student who is under their authority.”

Facts
The principle of a high school discovered two girls smoking in a laboratory.  One of the girls admitted she was smoking, which violated a school rule.  The second girl claimed she was not smoking and as such did not break the rule.  The assistant vice-principal took the student into his private office and demanded to search her purse.  While looking for cigarettes, the vice-principal found a package of cigarette rolling papers.  He continued searching the purse and found a small amount of marijuana and a pipe, a number of empty plastic bags and a substantial amount of one dollar bills and an index card with the names of various people who owed the student money.

Issue
What is the appropriate “standard for assessing the legality of searches conducted by public school officials and the application of that standard to the facts of this case[?]”

Held
The search did not violate the Fourth Amendment.  The majority observed, “we are faced initially with the question whether that Amendment’s prohibition on unreasonable searches and seizures applies to searches conducted by public school officials.”  The majority observed “[i]t is now beyond dispute that “the Federal Constitution, by virtue of the Fourteenth Amendment, prohibits unreasonable searches and seizures by state officers.’ ” Equally indisputable is the proposition that the Fourteenth Amendment protects the rights of students against encroachment by public school officials.”

Dissent
Justice Brennan and Justice Marshall concurred in part and dissented in part.  The justices observed we “fully agree with Part II of the Court’s opinion. Teachers, like all other government officials, must conform their conduct to the Fourth Amendment’s protections of personal privacy and personal security. As Justice Stevens points out, this principle is of particular importance when applied to schoolteachers, for children learn as much by example as by exposition. It would be incongruous and futile to charge teachers with the task of embuing their students with an understanding of our system of constitutional democracy, while at the same time immunizing those same teachers from the need to respect constitutional protections” “[The dissenting judges] do not, however, otherwise join the Court’s opinion. Today’s decision sanctions school officials to conduct fullscale searches on a ‘reasonableness’ standard whose only definite content is that it is not the same test as the ‘p

Discussion
This case illustrates another instance where the warrant requirement does not apply due to the uniqueness of the situation involved.

