Citation
466 U.S. 170, 104 S. Ct. 1735, 80 L. Ed. 2d 214 (1984)

Brief Fact Summary
Police officers found a marijuana field growing about a mile away from an individual’s home.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
“[A]n individual may not legitimately demand privacy for activities conducted out of doors in fields, except in the area immediately surrounding the home.”

Facts
Two narcotics officers went to a farm to investigate the growing of marijuana.  When the officers arrived at the farm they saw a “No Trespassing” sign.  The officers walked around a gate and continued on for several hundred yards.  They heard a voice that said “no hunting is allowed, come back up here”, but did not find anybody.  The officers eventually found the marijuana field over a mile from the Petitioner, Oliver’s home (the “Petitioner”).

Issue
Is the “open fields” doctrine still viable?

Held
The court observed that in [Hester v. United States] “the special protection accorded by the Fourth Amendment to the people in their `persons, houses, papers, and effects,’ is not extended to the open fields. The distinction between the latter and the house is as old as the common law.”  Further, the majority concluded “as did the Court in deciding [Hester v. United States], that the government’s intrusion upon the open fields is not one of those ‘unreasonable searches’ proscribed by the text of the Fourth Amendment.”

Dissent
Justice Marshall, Justice Brennan and Justice Stevens filed a dissenting opinion.  They could not agree that “(i) the Court argues that, because the Fourth Amendment by its terms renders people secure in their “persons, houses, papers, and effects,” it is inapplicable to trespasses upon land not lying within the curtilage of a dwelling; and (ii) the Court contends that “an individual may not legitimately demand privacy for activities conducted out of doors in fields, except in the area immediately surrounding the home.”  Instead, they conclude “[p]rivate land marked in a fashion sufficient to render entry thereon a criminal trespass under the law of the State in which the land lies is protected by the Fourth Amendment’s proscription of unreasonable searches and seizures.”

Discussion
It is interesting to read the majority and dissenting opinions along side one another to see how the justices reach opposite conclusions.

