Citation
159 ER 737, Volume 159<br />

Brief Fact Summary
Water from Defendant’s reservoir escaped onto Plaintiff’s land because of an unknown latent defect in Defendant’s subsoil. Plaintiff sued Defendant for trespass.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
This action is maintainable on the plain ground that Defendant has caused water to flow into Plaintiff’s land.

Facts
Flooding waters from a reservoir constructed on Defendant’s land damaged Plaintiff’s property. The water from the reservoir would not have escaped from Defendant’s land and no mischief would have been done to Plaintiff, but for a latent defect in Defendant’s subsoil. Plaintiff sued Defendant for trespass. Opinions are taken from the intermediate appellate court.

Issue
Is Defendant liable to Plaintiff in trespass for damage caused as a result of a defect in Defendant’s land if he was not aware of the defect?

Held
Yes. (B. Bramwell) Judgment for Plaintiff.

Dissent
(B. Martin) Judgment should be in favor of Defendant.

Discussion
In this case the court holds Defendant liable for the trespass on the theory of strict liability. Both opinions state that Defendant is not liable on a theory of trespass, nuisance, or negligence.Fletcher v. Rylands

Brief Fact Summary
Water from Defendant’s reservoir escaped onto Plaintiff’s land because of an unknown latent defect in Defendants’ subsoil. Plaintiff sued Defendant for trespass.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The person for whom his own purposes, brings on his lands and collects and keeps there anything likely to do mischief if it escapes, must keep it at his peril, and, if he does not do so, is prima facie answerable for all the damage which is the natural consequence of its escape.

Facts
Plaintiff was damaged by his property being flooded by water, which, without any fault, broke out of a reservoir constructed on Defendant’s land. Water in the reservoir would not have escaped from Defendant’s land and no mischief would have been done to Plaintiff, but for a latent defect in Defendant’s subsoil. Plaintiff sued Defendant for trespass.

Issue
Is Defendant liable to Plaintiff in trespass for damage caused as a result of a defect in Defendant’s land if they were not aware of the defect?

