Citation
22 Ill.232 Ky. 791, 24 S.W.2d 619 (1929)

Brief Fact Summary
The entrance of a cave was located on Edwards, the Petitioner’s (Petitioner) property. The Petitioner operated a public exhibition of the cave. A dispute arose because the Petitioner’s neighbor, Lee (Lee), felt the cave might extend under his property.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Despite the historical principle that property ownership includes ownership of both the air above and the soil below real estate, there are certain cases, such as this, where a court of equity is empowered to make rulings which prevent the property from being used to the detriment of or interference with contiguous property and owners.

Facts
The entrance to the Great Onyx Cave was located on the Petitioner’s property. The Petitioner opened the cave to exploitation and public show. Lee owned the neighboring property. In an underlying case, Lee sued the Petitioner to compel a survey of the cave to determine whether any portion of the cave fell within the boundaries of Lee’s property. In that case, the Respondent here, Chancellor Sims (Respondent) ordered a survey. The Petitioner appealed that ruling and the Court of Appeals found the appeal was filed prematurely. The Petitioner, being aggrieved, filed the instant case in the form of a Petition for Writ of Prohibition against Chancellor Sims, who was sitting as the court of equity.

Issue
Does the Court have the right to order the invasion of Petitioner’s land, for the purpose of conducting a survey, to determine conclusively the rights between two landowners in a dispute before the Court?

Held
Yes. The Writ of Prohibition is denied.

Dissent
The Dissent would hold that since the effect of the lower court’s order is to injure Edwards while no risk of injury is borne by Lee the case is wrongly decided. Also, that the surface land where the mouth of the cave is found should make the entirety of the cave the property of the person who owns the mouth. Further, no one should be allowed to own anything which they cannot subject to their dominion.

Discussion
The important principle from this case is that the right of a property owner is not absolute and that courts will, in rare instances, find exceptions to common-law historical maxims. It is useful also to consider the extraordinary remedy of the Writ of Prohibition, along with the requirements for issu

