Citation
494 U.S. 872, 110 S. Ct. 1595, 108 L. Ed. 2d 876, 1990 U.S. 2021.

Brief Fact Summary
The Respondent, Smith (Respondent), sought unemployment compensation benefits after he was fired from his job for using peyote in a religious ceremony. The Oregon Supreme Court ruled that the Respondent should be awarded unemployment compensation as his right to free exercise of religion was violated. The Petitioner, the Employment Division, Department of Human Resources (Petitioner), appeal the case.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The right of free exercise does not relive an individual of the obligation to comply with a valid and neutral law of general applicability on the ground that the law makes criminal conduct that his religion proscribes.

Facts
The Respondent was a member of the Native American Church, which has as a part of is religious rituals, the supervised consumption of peyote. Peyote is a controlled substance under Oregon law and possession of peyote is a criminal offense. The Respondent was fired from his job at a private drug rehabilitation clinic because he ingested peyote as part of his church’s ritual. The Respondent sought unemployment benefits, which where denied as he had been dismissed for work related misconduct. On his appeal from denial of unemployment benefits, the Oregon Supreme Court ruled that as the state law did not contain an exemption from its criminal statute for religious consumption of peyote, that the criminal ban was unconstitutional as applied to peyote in this setting and that the Respondent was entitled to unemployment compensation. The Petitioner appeals the case.

Issue
Whether a statute, which prohibits the use of religiously inspired peyote and denies unemployment benefits to those who have been dismissed from their job because of this use of peyote violates the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment of the United States Constitution (Constitution).

Held
Reversed.

Dissent
It is the State’s narrow interest in refusing to make an exception for the religious, ceremonial use of peyote that is in question and which violates the Free Exercise Clause of the Constitution.

Discussion
The Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment of the Constitution prohibits government interference with religious beliefs, but it generally does not prohibit regulation of conduct. If the governmental action regulates general conduct, including religious conduct it is valid. The Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment of the Constitution does not require religious exemption from generally applicable governmental regulations that happen to burden religious conduct.

