Citation
135 F.3d 361 (6th Cir. 1998)

Brief Fact Summary
Plaintiffs’ pickup truck was struck on a railroad crossing. The wife and daughter sustained injuries, but the husband died.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
There must be sufficient evidence presented to raise a material issue of fact for the jury. A directed verdict is proper only when no reasonable juror could find for the nonmoving party.

Facts
Plaintiffs were traveling in their pickup truck in a rural area. As the pickup truck approached the railroad crossing, the road narrowed and went up an incline to cross the elevated tracks. There were no lights, bells, or mechanical gates guarding the railroad crossing. The only warning devices were standard cross bucks. As the Plaintiffs crossed the tracks, the train struck and all three were thrown from the pickup truck. Husband died and wife and daughter sustained injuries. Plaintiffs alleged that CSX Transportation, Inc. (Defendant), was negligent in failing to sound a warning as the train approached the crossing, the train crew failed to exercise ordinary care in the operation of the train, and that the railroad crossing was extra-hazardous. The district court issued a directed verdict that the railroad crossing was not extra-hazardous. The jury returned a verdict for Defendant. Plaintiffs appealed.

Issue
There are two issues in this case:

Held
Yes, the district court correctly concluded that the crossing was not extra-hazardous as a matter of law. Yes, the jury verdict was supported by sufficient evidence. Judgment for Defendant affirmed.

Discussion
Under the applicable law, Defendants needed to produce evidence of the standards required for ultra-hazardous. Defendants failed to meet these standards and it was proper for the district court to hold that the crossing was not ultra-hazardous as a matter of law. The court gives substantial deference to jury verdicts. The jury is the trier of fact, so they determine who is lying and who is telling the truth. There was evidence presented that the whistle was sounded prior to the collision. It does not matter that more evidence was presented that it was not sounded. The jury believed the conductor’s testimony and the court would not substitute its fact-finding for that of the jury’s

