Citation
60 F.2d 737 (2d Cir. 1932)<br />

Brief Fact Summary
Plaintiff’s two barges, towed by Defendant’s tugboats, were lost in a storm. Plaintiff sued Defendant for negligence for failing to equip the tugboats with reliable radios, which would have warned Defendant of the storm.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
If new technology is developed, and it is widely used and accepted, then it is negligent not to utilize it.

Facts
Defendant, the operator of the T.J. Hooper and the Montrose tugboats, did not have reliable radios on board. Plaintiff sued Defendant under a towing contract when two barges and the cargo of coal were lost in a storm. The gist of Plaintiff’s negligence claim stated that it was negligent of Defendant not to equip the tugboats with reliable radios. If the tugboats had radios Defendant would have received storm warnings and Plaintiff’s two barges would have been put safely into breakwater. Four other tugs were on the same route as Defendant and avoided the storm because of reliable radios.

Issue
Is Defendant required to equip his tugboats with radio sets to pick up weather reports?

Held
Yes. Judgment for Plaintiff.

Discussion
In this case, Defendant is held to be negligent because he did not equip the tugboats with radios, which had become custom.The T.J. Hooper

Brief Fact Summary
Plaintiff’s two barges, towed by Defendant’s tugboats, were lost in a storm. Plaintiff sued Defendant in negligence for failing to equip the tugboats with reliable radios, which would have warned Defendant of the storm.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
If the utility of a safety precaution outweighs the cost of the precaution, then it is negligent not to carry the safety precaution. An industry’s general custom does not dictate the standard of care. The courts decide what is required of the parties.

Facts
Defendant, the operator of the T.J.Hooper and the Montrose tugboats, did not have reliable radios on board. Plaintiff sued Defendant under a towing contract when two barges and the cargo of coal were lost in a storm. The gist of Plaintiff’s negligence claim stated that it was negligent of Defendant not to equip the tugboats with reliable radios. If the tugboats had radios, Defendant would have received storm warnings and Plaintiff’s two barges would have been put safely into breakwater. Four other tugs were on the same route as Defendant and avoided the storm because of reliable radios. Lower court judgment for Plaintiff. Defendant appealed.

Issue
Is Defendant negligent for failing to equip his tugboats with radios?

