Citation
132 Eng. Rep. 490 (C.P. 1837).

Brief Fact Summary
Defendant’s rick of hay burst into flames after several repeated warnings of the possibility of fire. Plaintiff’s neighboring cottages were consumed in the fire. Plaintiff sued Defendant for gross negligence.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
In assessing Defendant’s liability under a theory of gross negligence, Defendant is bound to proceed with such reasonable caution as a prudent man would have exercised under similar circumstances.

Facts
Plaintiff owned two cottages. Defendant was Plaintiff’s neighbor. Defendant placed a haystack, or rick, on his property, but near its boundaries. The placement of the hay gave rise to discussions regarding the probability of a fire. In the period of five weeks, Defendant was warned of the possibility of fire. On one occasion, he said, “he would chance it.” Defendant made an aperture or chimney through the rick, which burst into flames from the spontaneous heating of its materials. The flames consumed Defendant’s barn and staples and Plaintiff’s cottages, which were entirely destroyed. The jury returned a verdict for Plaintiff. Defendant appealed.

Issue
In a claim of gross negligence, is Defendant bound to proceed with such reasonable caution as a prudent man would have exercised under the circumstances?

Held
Yes. Judgment for Plaintiff affirmed.

Dissent
(R.V. Richards) There was no duty on Defendant to be responsible for the exercise of any given degree of prudence. Defendant had the right to place his rick of hay as close to the boundary of his property as he pleased. Defendant is only required to act according to his best judgment. What is and what is not gross negligence ought to be estimated by the faculties of the individual. If a jury deems Defendant to have subjectively believed the rick to be safe, then Defendant should not be liable under a theory of gross negligence.

Discussion
In this case, the court adopts the objective prudent, cautious man standard. The court paid special attention to the fact that Defendant stated he would chance it when observers warned Defendant of the possibility of fire. In all claims of gross negligence, a Defendant must use that standard of care used by a reasonable, cautious, prudent man to avoid liability.

