Citation
25 Cal. 2d 486, 154 P.2d 687, 1944 Cal.

Brief Fact Summary
Plaintiff brought suit for negligence after he sustained injuries by Defendants during the course of a surgical operation. Judgment was entered for Defendants after the court held that the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur did not apply.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
When Plaintiff receives unusual injuries while unconscious and in the course of medial treatment, all those defendants who had any control over his body or the instrumentalities, which might have caused the injuries, may properly be called upon to meet the inference of negligence by giving an explanation of their conduct.

Facts
Plaintiff consulted Dr. Tilley (Defendant) who diagnosed his ailment as appendicitis. An appendectomy was to be performed by Dr. Spangard (Defendant). Plaintiff was given a hypodermic injection and was awaken by Dr. Tilley and Dr. Spangard to be wheeled into the operating room by nurse Gisler (Defendant). Dr. Reser gave Plaintiff an anesthetic and Plaintiff lost consciousness. The next morning, Plaintiff regained consciousness and was accompanied by special nurse Thompson (Defendant), and another nurse who was not a party to the suit. When Plaintiff regained consciousness, he felt a sharp pain in his right shoulder. Prior to the appendectomy, Plaintiff did not have pain or a prior injury to his right shoulder. The condition grew worse and Plaintiff developed paralysis and atrophy of the muscles around his shoulder. Plaintiff sued Defendants for negligence. The trial court entered judgments of nonsuit as to all defendants. Plaintiffs appealed. Plaintiff’s theory is that there i

Issue
Is res ipsa loquitur appropriately invoked in cases of injury from medical treatments when there were multiple doctors and nurses involved in the care of a patient?

Held
Yes. Judgment reversed.

Discussion
If res ipsa loquitur was not applicable, then Defendants would be free to keep silent and Plaintiff would not be able to recover for his injuries. When the xourt determines that res ipsa loquitur should apply, negligence is presumed to all Defendants in the care of Plaintiff. It forces Defendants to talk, discuss, and point to the cause of Plaintiff’s injuries. It essentially transfers the burden to Defendants. This is appropriate because the Defendants had exclusive control over Plaintiff, the injury was not the type that would occur without negligence and Plaintiff did not contribute to his inj

