Citation
22 Ill.495 U.S. 604, 110 S. Ct. 2105, 109 L. Ed. 2d 631 (1990)

Brief Fact Summary
Defendant’s estranged spouse filed for divorce in California. Defendant was a resident of New Jersey. Defendant traveled to California to conduct business and visit his children. While in California, Defendant was served with a divorce summons, which Defendant moved to quash.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Physical presence in the forum state is enough to establish personal jurisdiction over the defendant. The minimum contacts test from [International Shoe Co. v. Washington, 326 U.S. 310, 66 S.Ct. 154, 90 L.Ed. 95 (1945),] only applies to non-resident defendants absent from the state.

Facts
Burnham (Defendant) and his spouse married in New Jersey. The couple decided to separate and his spouse moved to California with their two children. In January 1988, Defendant’s spouse brought suit for divorce in California state court. At that same time, Defendant went to California on business and visited his children. When he went to his spouse’s home, he was served with a California court summons and a copy of the divorce petition. He then went back to New Jersey. He made a special appearance and moved to quash the summons on the grounds that California lacked personal jurisdiction because his only contacts with California consisted of occasional business trips and visits to his children. The motion was denied and the Court of Appeals denied mandamus relief. The Supreme Court of the United States granted certiorari.

Issue
Is physical presence in the forum state sufficient for the forum state to assert in personam jurisdiction?

Held
Yes (plurality)

Discussion
The majority illustrates that the minimum contacts test only applies if the forum state does not have traditional personal jurisdiction over the defendant. The majority’s opinion should be compared with Justice Brennan’s concurrence, which provides an analysis of Burnham’s contacts and concludes that it satisfies the minimum contacts test of International Sh

