Citation
22 Ill.22 Ill. 2d 432, 176 N.E.2d 761 (1961)

Brief Fact Summary
Plaintiff sued Defendants in Illinois state court on the grounds that a hot water heater and a valve manufactured by Defendants were defective and caused injury to Plaintiff. The defendant that manufactured the valve moved to dismiss for lack of jurisdiction because it did not do any business in Illinois nor cause the valve to be in Illinois. The trial court dismissed and Plaintiff appealed.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The constitutionality of a long-arm statute is determined by looking at whether the “minimum contacts” test is satisfied and then looking to the reasonableness of notice under the statute. When the statute covers a particular event and that event both relates to the case and occurred in the forum state, the event satisfies the “minimum contacts” test needed to establish specific personal jurisdiction.

Facts
Gray (Plaintiff) suffered personal injuries due to the explosion of a hot water heater. Plaintiff sued Titan Valve Manufacturing Company, a foreign corporation, for negligently constructing a piece of the heater, and also sued a American Radiator & Standard Sanitary Corp, the manufacturer of the heater, in Illinois state court. Titan Vavle filed a motion to dismiss on the ground that it did no business in the state of Illinois when it sold its parts to American Radiator. American Radiator filed a cross-claim against Titan Valve seeking indemnification. Under Illinois’ long-arm statute, when a defendant commits a tortious act within the state, the defendant is subject to personal jurisdiction in Illinois. Titan Valve argued that the “tortious act” allegedly committed refers to the negligent act and not where Plaintiff was injured. The complaint and the cross claim was dismissed by the trial court because the trial court found that Illinois did not have jurisdiction. Plaintiff a

Issue
Is the term “tortious act” under the state long-arm statute the place where the tortious conduct took place as opposed the place where the injury occurred?

Held
First issue: no. Second issue: yes. Reversed and remanded.

Discussion
Long-arm statutes providing for personal jurisdiction over defendants that commit “tortious” acts within the forum state will give jurisdiction over the defendant only for lawsuits relating to those acts. The “tortious act” can be the injury as opposed to the alleged tortious conduct because the injury is considered the end result.

