Citation
462 U.S. 919, 103 S. Ct. 2764, 77 L. Ed. 2d 317, 1983 U.S. 80.

Brief Fact Summary
Pursuant to the Immigration and Nationality Act (the Act), which authorized either House of Congress to invalidate and suspend deportation rulings of the United States Attorney General (Attorney General), the House of Representatives (the House) suspended an immigration judge’s deportation ruling regarding Chadha.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Where the House takes actions that have the purpose and effect of altering legal rights, duties, or relations of persons outside of the legislative branch, bicameralism and presentment are required.

Facts
Chadha overstayed his student visa and was asked to show cause why he should not be deported. After a hearing, the immigration judge ordered that Chadha’s deportation be suspended on the grounds that he would suffer “extreme hardship” if deported. Under the Act, once the Attorney General’s recommendation for suspension of a deportation was conveyed to Congress, the House had the power to veto the Attorney General’s determination. After the House veto of the Attorney General’s decision to allow Chadha to remain in the United States, Chadha was deported. Since the House action was pursuant to the Act, the resolution was not submitted to the Senate or presented to the President.

Issue
Was the part of the Act authorizing a “one House veto” constitutional?

Held
No. The Act violated explicit constitutional standards of lawmaking and congressional authority.

Dissent
Justice Byron White (J. White) stated that this decision sounds the death knell for nearly 200 other statutory provisions for which Congress retains a legislative veto. The Supreme Court of the United States (Supreme Court) should have decided this case on the narrower grounds of separation of powers.

Discussion
The student must be cognizant of the nature of Congress’ actions. If they are legislative in nature than Congress must comply with the constitutional requirements of bicameralism and presentment

