Citation
479 N.W.2d 38, 1991 Minn. 23 A.L.R.5th 954.

Brief Fact Summary
The Court of Appeals of Minnesota affirmed a trial court’s granting of summary judgment to Milwaukee Mutual Insurance Company (Defendant) in Harriet G. Wenger’s (Plaintiff’s) action for damages caused to her house when city police flushed out a criminal suspect hiding in the house. The homeowner challenged the judgment.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
In situations where an innocent third party’s property is taken, damaged or destroyed by the police in the course of apprehending a suspect, it is for the municipality to compensate the innocent party for the resulting damages.

Facts
On August 27, 1986, Minneapolis police were staking out an address in Northeast Minneapolis in the hopes of apprehending two suspected felons who were believed to be coming to that address to sell stolen narcotics. The suspects arrived at the address with the stolen narcotics. Before arrests could be made, however, the suspects spotted the police and fled in their car at a high rate of speed with the police in pursuit. Eventually, the suspects abandoned their vehicle, separated, and fled on foot. The police exchanged gunfire with one suspect as he fled. This suspect later entered Plaintiff’s house and hid in the front closet. Plaintiff’s granddaughter, who was living at the house, and her fiance then fled the premises and notified the police.

Issue
At issue was whether the exercise of the city’s admittedly legitimate police power resulted in a “taking”, and thus required compensation on the part of the city.

Held
When a homeowner’s property is taken (in the legal sense), damaged or destroyed by the police in the course of apprehending a suspect, the municipality is required to compensate the innocent party for the resulting damages. Thus, the judgments of the lower courts were reversed and the cause remanded for trial on the issue of damages.

Discussion
The Minnesota State Constitution essentially mirrors the federal rule: “[p]rivate property shall not be taken, destroyed or damaged for public use without just compensation, first paid or secured. This provision imposes a condition on the exercise of the state’s inherent supremacy over private property rights. This type of constitutional

