Citation
Sup. Ct., 893 A 2d 87 (2006)

Brief Fact Summary
Theresa (Daughter of Richard Chen (Father (D)) (D)) intervention in a support action brought against Richard Chen (D) by his former wife and Mother (P) of his Daughter, Wheamei Chen (P) was contended by Richard Chen (D) on the ground that his Daughter was only an incidental beneficiary, not an intended beneficiary of the property settlement agreement (Agreement) at issue.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
An action to enforce support provisions of a parent’s property settlement agreement, where the support payments are to be made to the custodial parent is at the option of the child.

Facts
Richard Chen (Father (D)) (P) and Wheamei Chen (Mother (P)) (P) divorced when their children were still kids. They had a son and a Daughter together. The Daughter’s name was Theresa. The property settlement agreement (Agreement) entered into stipulated that Father (D) was to pay $25 per week for the upkeep of his Daughter, who at this time was just a year old. The condition attached to this was that the Father (D) would increase this amount upon obtaining regular employment and as his salary increased in accordance with the county’s domestic relations guidelines. This Agreement was not merged with the divorce decree but was incorporated just as a reference.

Issue
does a child have the option of intervening or bring suit in an action to enforce support provisions of a parents’ property settlement agreement where the support payments are to be made to the custodial parent?

Held
(Baer, J.) No. An action to enforce support provisions of a parents’ property settlement agreement, where the support payments are to be made to the custodial parent is at the option of the child. The contention of the Father (D) was that at the time the Agreement was made, both parties did not view Daughter as an intended beneficiary, but as an incidental beneficiary. The Father (D) based is argument that his Daughter was not meant to be receiving the payment and that permitting children to intervene in their parents’ support agreement will open a lacuna for a child to sue his/her parent by equating the right to be supported with the right to support payments.

Concurrence
(Cappy, C.J.) the court did not err in its decision on relying on the view of majority on contract law principles. However, the majority should not have widened the scope of the issue to include discussion of policy issues and other matters.

Discussion
This case typifies that the court supports children seeking to enforce provisions of their parents’ separation agreements’ express provisions that provide benefits to flowing directly to them. This clearly show that the children are intended rather than intended beneficiaries and so, resolving cases of this nature can be accomplished through contract principles alone without having rcourse to policy considerations.

