Citation
22 Ill.390 U.S. 102, 88 S. Ct. 733, 19 L. Ed. 2d 936 (1968)

Brief Fact Summary
Three individuals were in a car accident involving a car whose owner was not present at the time and another truck. Three of the people were killed, including the driver of the truck, and one survived. One decedent’s estate brought an action to enforce a previous judgment against the driver’s estate and the car owner’s insurance company but not the car owner, on the grounds that the driver was covered under the car owner’s policy because the driver had permission to drive the vehicle.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The interests articulated in Rule 19(b) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure must be evaluated by the Court prior to disposition of the case in order to determine whether a case should be dismissed for failure to join an indispensable party. The decision rendered should always be consistent with “equity and good conscience.”

Facts
Dutcher let Cionci borrow his car. Cionci, Harris and Lynch were in Dutcher’s car when it collided with a truck driven by Smith. Cionci, Lynch and Smith were killed and Harris was badly injured. All individuals as Plaintiffs or Plaintiff’s decedents (Lynch, Harris, Smith) as well as Dutcher were residents of Pennsylvania. Provident Tradesmen Bank, the administrator of Lynch’s estate and Plaintiff in the present action sued Cionci’s estate and settled for $50,000. The settlement was unsatisfied because Cionci’s estate did not have any money. Smith and Harris’ estates brought state court actions against Cionci’s estate and Lynch’s estate, which were still pending. Dutcher has an insurance policy with Lumbermens Mutual Casualty Company (”Lumbermens”) with a limit of $100,000. The insurance company refused to defend on the grounds that Cionci was not covered as an insured under the policy because he did not have permission from Dutcher to drive the car. Plaintiffs’ decedents sued Cionci’s estate and Lumbermens in federal court in Pennsylvania, based on diversity, seeking a declaration that Cionci was driving with permission and was thus covered under the insurance policy. The District Court found in favor of the two estates. Defendant appealed, arguing non-liability on Pennsylvania state law grounds. The Court of Appeals reversed on the grounds that Dutcher was an indispensable party and should have been joined. Because Dutcher’s joinder in the action would have destroyed diversity, the case should be dismissed. Plaintiff appealed.

Issue
Should the court have dismissed an action if joinder of Dutcher was not feasible?  Does the parties’ failure to raise an issue regarding joinder of Dutcher prevent the appellate court from addressing the issue on appeal?  Does a judgment binding on the parties but not on Dutcher affect the evaluation of whether the Court should have been required to join Dutcher?

Held
First issue: No. Second issue: Yes, by rendering some of the issues, such as efficiency of ordering joinder, the issue is obsolete. Third issue: Yes because it gives   Plaintiffs’ interest in the forum greater consideration rather than if the evaluation were just whether Plaintiffs had an interest in choosing between the state and federal courts.  Under Rule 19(b) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, when considering whether the action should proceed without an absent party, the Court must consider the Plaintiffs’ interest in the forum, the Defendant’s interest in avoiding duplicate litigation, the absent party’s desire to join, and the Court and public’s interest in consistent and complete resolution of cases.  As to the Plaintiffs’ interest in the forum: The fact that Plaintiffs have already secured a judgment should require a stronger showing of prevailing interests.  As to the Defendant’s interest in avoiding multiple litigation: The Defendant has no valid fear of being subject to more litigation unless Dutcher were joined. The only reason Dutcher could benefit Defendant is so that it may escape liability. This is not a valid reason.  As to Dutcher’s interest: A ruling against the insurance company does not harm Dutcher although it may not be in his favor because it would deplete the funds of his policy. There is only a small likelihood that Dutcher would be foreclosed from arguing that he did not give Cionci permission in subsequent actions. Therefore, he may be able to relitigate the issue of “permission.”  Dutcher’s interest continued: Even if he is bound by the District Court’s decision on the permission issue, it is from Dutcher’s failure to intervene and not the District Court’s failure to order joinder that would cause the problem for Dutcher.  Dutcher’s interest continued: Dutcher most likely will not be personally liable for any claims arising from the accident. Whether or not Dutcher loses on the merits of the permission issue or is foreclosed from arguing the permission issue in subsequent litigation for failure to intervene in this case, he is still not prejudiced by the Court’s failure to join him in this action.  As to the Court’s interest in consistency and complete actions (”efficiency”): When the case reached the appellate level there was a valid judgment against Defendant, the interest in efficiency and preventing Dutcher from relitigating the issue had already passed.  An indispensable party is not a party whose interest “may be affected” by a final order. It is only those whose interest may be affected by a final order so that a final order cannot be issued without affecting those rights. In addition, if the final order can be issued to not affect the rights but is not consistent with “equity and good conscience,” the case should be dismissed if the party affected cannot be joined.  Not all parties have a substantive right to be joined under Rule 19 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. The interests articulated in Rule 19(b) must be evaluated to determine if such a substantive right exists in a particular situation.

Discussion
The Court’s evaluation shows that whether a party is indispensable requires a careful analysis requiring an application of each articulated factor to the facts and circumstances of the case. The Court emphasizes that such an evaluation should be made prior to the disposition of the case. The fact that judgment had been entered before the Court of Appeals found Dutcher indispensable was disapproved of by the Court, as some of the factors considered under Rule 19(b) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure became less relevant. The theme of the Court’s decision expresses a reluctance to dismiss a case for failure to join a party. The court should dismiss the case only it cannot dispose of a case without disposing of the rights of the absent party.

