Citation
478 U.S. 186, 106 S. Ct. 2841, 92 L. Ed. 2d 140 (1986)

Brief Fact Summary
Respondent was convicted under Georgia’s anti-sodomy statute for engaging in a sex act with another male.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
There is no fundamental constitutional right to engage in homosexual sodomy.

Facts
Georgia’s sodomy statute made it a crime to commit any sexual act involving the sex organs of one person and the mouth or anus of another. Respondent, an adult male, was convicted under the statute for committing a sex act with another male. Respondent was in his own bedroom at the time he committed the offense.

Issue
Does the United States Constitution confer a right of privacy that extends to homosexual sodomy?

Held
No.

Dissent
Justice Blackmun: This case is really about one of the most comprehensive of rights of civilized men, namely, the right to be left alone. Moreover, the behavior for which Respondent is charged occurred in the privacy of his own home – a place to which the Fourth Amendment attaches special significance.<br />	Justice Stevens: The liberty interests addressed in our privacy line of cases surely embraces the right to engage in non-reproductive sexual conduct in the privacy of one’s home that others may consider offensive.<br />Concurrence.<br />	Chief Justice Burger: The proscriptions against homosexual sodomy have ancient roots. Nothing in the United States Constitution protects such conduct.<br />	Justice Powell: I concur in the judgment, but a sentence for homosexual sodomy could create an Eighth Amendment issue, which proscribes cruel and unusual punishment.<br />

Discussion
The potential implications of the Supreme Court of the United States’ reasoning here are extraordinary. Under the Supreme Court’s reasoning a State could arguably make almost any form of heterosexual sexual behavior between unmarried adults, entered into in the privacy of their own homes, illegal. This case is later overturned by Lawrence and Garner v. Texas, 539 U.S. 558 (2003).

