Citation
381 U.S. 479, 85 S. Ct. 1678, 14 L. Ed. 2d 510, 1965 U.S. 2282.

Brief Fact Summary
A Connecticut statute prohibited the use of contraceptives both by married and unmarried persons. The statute also prohibited anyone from helping couples obtain contraceptives. Griswold provided information as to the means of preventing conception and was fined as an accessory under the statute.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A law which seeks to achieve its goals by means having a destructive impact on a relationship lying within the zone of privacy may not be achieved by means that sweep unnecessarily broadly and thereby invade that area of freedom.

Facts
A Connecticut statute prohibited the use of any drugs or other instruments designed to prevent conception. Appellants, Griswold and Buxton, gave medical advice to married persons on how to prevent conception and thereupon were convicted under the statute. Subsequently, Appellants challenged the constitutionality of the statute. The purpose of the statute was to discourage all forms of promiscuous or illicit sexual relationships.

Issue
Was the Connecticut statute constitutional?

Held
No. Reversed.

Dissent
Justice Black: The government has the right to invade a person’s privacy, unless such an invasion is prohibited by some specific constitutional provision.<br />	Justice Stewart: Justice Stewart could find no right of privacy in the Bill of Rights, in any other part of the United States Constitution, or in any case ever decided by the Supreme Court of the United States.<br />Concurrence.<br />	Justice Harlan: The proper question in this case is whether the statute infringes on the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, because the law violates basic values implicit in the idea of ordered liberty.<br />	Justice White: Justice White could not see how the Connecticut statute in any way furthers its purpose of preventing illicit sexual relationships.<br />

Discussion
The right to privacy is not explicitly mentioned in the United States Constitution. This case reveals that such a right extends to activities relating to marriage. Later cases will further flesh out the right to privacy.

