Citation
290 U.S. 398, 54 S. Ct. 231, 78 L. Ed. 413, 1934 U.S. 958.

Brief Fact Summary
As an emergency measure, during the Great Depression, Minnesota passed a law that modified lender’s contractual rights of foreclosure with their debtors. The constitutionality of the law was brought into question.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A State action that impairs a private contract is not valid unless it is reasonably related to the achievement of a legitimate State end.

Facts
In the midst of the Great Depression, Minnesota passed a law declaring an emergency and saying that during the emergency period courts could extend the time periods in which mortgagers could pay back their debts to their lenders. Pursuant to the statute, Blaisdell’s period of redemption was extended, unquestionably modifying the lender’s contractual rights of foreclosure. The constitutionality of the law was brought into question.

Issue
Did the Minnesota law violate the provision of the United States Constitution which prohibits a state from impairing the obligations of contracts?

Held
No. The law was a legitimate use of its police powers since Minnesota faced massive economic difficulties.

Dissent
Justice Sutherland: A provision of the United States Constitution cannot be interpreted in two distinctly opposite ways. It cannot mean one thing under certain conditions and another thing under other conditions. If the provisions of the Constitution cannot be upheld when it discomforts us as well as when it comforts us, they may as well be abandoned.

Discussion
The Supreme Court in this case would have us view the Contract Clause not so much as a provision intended to confer a right on citizens as individuals, e.g., for the protection of private citizens entering into personal contracts; but rather as a provision that confers a right on the citizens collectively, e.g., for the protection of a sound credit market we all can enjoy. Viewing the clause as the latter type of right, it seems more justifiable for the government do as it has done here – adjust the private rights of individual citizens for the benefit of the public.

