Citation
505 U.S. 1003, 112 S. Ct. 2886, 120 L. Ed. 2d 798, 34 ERC 1897 (1992)

Brief Fact Summary
Petitioner purchased two residential lots in South Carolina with the intention of building single family homes on them. Two years later, the South Carolina legislature enacted a law barring Petitioner from building on the land. Petitioner sued.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
While property may be regulated to a certain extent, if regulation goes too far it will be recognized as a taking requiring just compensation under the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution.

Facts
In 1986, Petitioner, David Lucas bought two residential lots on the Isle of Palms, Charleston County, South Carolina. He intended to build single-family homes on the lots. At the time Petitioner purchased the lots they were zoned for single-family residential construction and with no restrictions imposed upon this use. In 1988, the South Carolina legislature enacted the Beachfront Management Act (the “Act”), which barred Lucas from erecting any permanent habitable structures on his two parcels of land. Petitioner filed suit against the South Carolina Coastal Council who had deemed, with legislative authority, Petitioner’s land as protected under the Act, claiming that his land had been taken without just compensation, but Petitioner did not challenge the facial validity of the Act. Petitioner claimed that the Act’s complete extinguishment of his property’s value entitled him to compensation regardless of whether the legislature had acted in furtherance of legitimate police pow

Issue
Did the construction ban depriving Petitioner of all economically viable use of his property amount to a “taking” requiring “just compensation” under the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments?

Held
Yes. Judgment reversed and remanded.

Dissent
Justice Blackmun: The Supreme Court of the United States has created a rationale for disregarding a component of basic Fifth Amendment Takings Clause jurisprudence: that a case specific inquiry be launched into the public interest advanced by the State to justify its regulation. At issue here was a nuisance. The State has not ‘taken’ anything when it asserts its power to enjoin a nuisance.<br />	Justice Stevens: The Supreme Court’s new rule is wholly arbitrary: A landowner whose property is diminished by 95% would recover nothing, but one whose property is diminished 100% recovers everything. Moreover, the Supreme Court is denying the State legislatures much of their traditional powers to revise the law governing the rights and uses of property.<br />Concurrence.  Justice Kennedy: The Takings Clause protects private expectations to ensure private investment. The means as well as the ends of regulation must jibe with a landowner’s reasonable expectations.<br />

Discussion
This case provides an example of a government “taking” resulting from a regulation of property. As such, this case is distinguishable from Penn Central Transportation Co. v. New York City, 438 U.S. 104 (1978) in which the Supreme Court of the United States found that the regulation of certain property did not amount to a taking.<br />	The Supreme Court also considered it significant that the property was not being regulated when the property owner bought it. Therefore, the property owner could not be said to have expected the loss from regulation before he bought the prope

