Citation
505 U.S. 833, 112 S. Ct. 2791, 120 L. Ed. 2d 674, 1992 U.S. 4751.

Brief Fact Summary
A Pennsylvania law imposed several obligations on women seeking abortions. The constitutionality of the law was brought into question.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A law is invalid, if its purpose or effect is to place a substantial obstacle (i.e., an “undue burden”) in the path of a woman seeking an abortion at a stage of her pregnancy before the fetus attains viability.

Facts
The Pennsylvania Abortion Control Act (the “Act”) imposed several obligations on women seeking abortions and medical practitioners (for the details, see the issues section below). The Act exempted compliance with the obligations in the event of a medical emergency. The constitutionality of the Act was brought into question.

Issue
Was the requirement of the Act that a woman give her informed consent prior to obtaining an abortion procedure constitutional under the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution?

Held
Because neither the factual underpinnings of Roe v. Wade, nor the Supreme Court’s of the United States’ understanding of the law as it concerns Roe has changed since 1973, a woman’s right to an abortion as announced in Roe is upheld. Accordingly, a State’s interest in the life of the unborn has sufficient force so that a woman’s right to an abortion can be restricted. As to when in the stage of a pregnancy the right to an abortion can be restricted, the Supreme Court hereby rejects the trimester framework of Roe and announces the “undue burden” standard. Under this approach, all of the Act, except the parental consent requirement, the Court finds proper. The Supreme Court’s reasoning is as follows:

Dissent
Justice Blackmun: Would hold that the 24-hour waiting period is clearly unconstitutional. The recordkeeping and reporting requirements are unconstitutional. A regulation designed to inform the public about public expenditures does not further the State’s interest in protection maternal health.

Discussion
This case is really one about whether Roe v. Wade should be overturned. The Supreme Court here says no. The Supreme Court does decide to change the methodological structure Roe announced for evaluating whether particular laws burdening a woman’s right to an abortion amount to constitutional violations. Rejecting the trimester framework of Roe, the Supreme Court here announces the undue burden analysis, whereby a law is held unconstitutional it is poses an undue burden on a woman at a stage of her pregnancy before the fetus has become viable. Justice O’Connor, for the majority, writes that the trimester framework was never intended to be the essence of the holding in Roe. The essence of Roe, writes Justice O’Connor, was that a woman’s right to have an abortion is fundamental.

