Citation
457 U.S. 202, 102 S. Ct. 2382, 72 L. Ed. 2d 786, 1982 U.S. 124.

Brief Fact Summary
Pursuant to a Texas law, a local school district conditioned the enrollment in its schools of the children of illegal aliens on their payment of a “tuition fee.” The constitutionality of the statute was brought into question.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The denial of the free public education to the children of undocumented aliens within a state’s borders must be justified by a showing that such denial substantially furthers a substantial state interest.

Facts
A Texas statute authorized local school districts to deny free public education to the children of illegal aliens. Accordingly, a local school district conditioned the enrollment of such children in its schools on their payment of a “tuition fee”. The stated purpose of the alienage-based classification was to conserve limited governmental resources. Apellees, the children of illegal entrants, challenged the constitutionality of the classification on equal protection grounds.

Issue
By which standard of review should the courts evaluate the alienage-based classification at issue?

Held
Intermediate level scrutiny and no.

Dissent
Chief Justice Burger: Once it was established that illegal aliens are not a suspect class and that education is not a fundamental right, our analysis should have focused on whether the legislative classification bore a rational relationship to a legitimate state purpose. It is not irrational for a State to conclude that it owes a lesser responsibility to persons not legally present in the United States.

Discussion
The Supreme Court seems to find a “semi-fundamental” right here by employing a line of reasoning similar to that of Justice Marshall in his dissenting opinion in Rodriguez. In that case, Justice Marshall suggested that the Supreme Court apply a range of standards of review, intermediate between rational basis and strict scrutiny, of which the level of scrutiny for a particular case would depend on the governmental interest at stake and the invidiousness of the discrimination at issue.

