Citation
410 U.S. 113, 93 S. Ct. 705, 35 L. Ed. 2d 147, 1973 U.S.

Brief Fact Summary
A Texas statute made procuring an abortion a crime. The constitutionality of the statute was brought into question.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The decision of a woman to have an abortion is a fundamental right guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment. As such, the State may not interfere with this right absent a compelling governmental interest and narrow tailoring of the law to the compelling governmental interest.

Facts
A Texas statute made procuring an abortion a crime except for the purpose of saving the mother. The asserted purposes for the law were to protect pregnant woman from a hazardous procedure and to protect prenatal life. The constitutionality of the statute was brought into question.

Issue
Was the Texas statute proscribing, altogether, a woman’s right to have an abortion constitutional?

Held
No.

Dissent
Justice White: The Supreme Court simply fashions and announces a new constitutional right in this case. Nothing in the language or history of the United States Constitution supports the Supreme Court’s judgment.

Discussion
This case ends the states’ right to absolutely regulate a woman’s right to an abortion. It does so by announcing that a woman’s right to an abortion is fundamental. The Supreme Court explains that only personal rights that can be deemed “fundamental” or “implicit” in the concept of ordered liberty are included in the guarantee of personal privacy. The Supreme Court seems to reach the conclusion quickly that there are two competing fundamental interests implicated in this case: (1) a woman’s interest in her right of privacy concerning a decision whether to have an abortion; and (2) a State’s interest in preserving the life of a potential human being. The overwhelming majority of the opinion in the case, in the Stone case book, is devoted to the issue of when (i.e., at what stage of a pregnancy) and to what extent should one of the fundamental interests give way to the other.

