Citation
530 U.S. 914, 120 S. Ct. 2597, 147 L. Ed. 2d 743, 2000 U.S. 4484.

Brief Fact Summary
A Nebraska law provided that no partial birth abortion shall be performed in the state, unless such procedure is necessary to save the life of the mother. The constitutionality of the Nebraska law was brought into question.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A State may not regulate abortions in such a way that disregards the risk of injury to health of a woman.

Facts
A Nebraska law provided that no partial birth abortion shall be performed in the state, unless such procedure is necessary to save the life of the mother. The statute defined a partial birth abortion as a procedure in which a person “partially delivers vaginally a living unborn child before killing the unborn child and completing the delivery.” It further defines the procedure as intentionally delivering into the vagina a living unborn child, or a substantial portion thereof, for the purpose of performing a procedure that will result in the death of the unborn child. There were two common ways of performing a partial birth abortion: (1) the Dilation and Evacuation Method (D&E), which entails terminating the life of the fetus while the fetus remains in the body; and (2) the Dilation and Extraction Method (D&X), requiring the doctor to initiate a woman’s natural delivery process and to terminate the fetus’ life after its arms and legs have been brought outside of a woman’s body.

Issue
Did the Nebraska statute, banning the performance of a “partial birth abortion,” violate the United States Constitution?

Held
Yes.

Dissent
Justice Kennedy: The majority errs in two principle ways: (1) it fails to recognize the legitimacy of a state’s interest in forbidding medical procedures that might cause that profession to become disdainful to life; (2) it mandates that a ban on D&X must include an exception whenever an individual doctor believes it will best preserve the health of the woman.

Discussion
This case raises the question of which ends are legitimate state interests under the undue burden test (whether a law designed to further the State’s interest in fetal life imposes an undue burden on the woman’s decision before fetal viability) of Casey. It is well recognized that the states can regulate abortions, to a limited extent, for the purposes of preserving the health of a woman or of discouraging abortions. But, may a state also regulate for the purpose of preventing the coarsening of the perceptions of the medical profession and society from a practice that looks like infanticide? Also, drawn into question here is whether a state may regulate abortions in such a way that creates any (even minute) health risk to a woman. The Supreme Court is obviously applying the strict scrutiny standard of review on the facts in this case.

