Citation
83 U.S. 36, 21 L. Ed. 394, 872 U.S. 1139,16 Wall. 36.

Brief Fact Summary
A Louisiana statute gave the Slaughter-House Company exclusive rights to the New Orleans slaughterhouse business. Plaintiffs, a group of butchers (Plaintiffs) sued.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
In interpreting a provision of the United States Constitution (Constitution), it is necessary to look to the purpose for which the provision was enacted.

Facts
A Louisiana statute granted to the Crescent City Live-Stock Landing and Slaughter-House Company the exclusive rights to engage in the livestock landing and slaughterhouse business in the City of New Orleans. Plaintiffs argued that the monopoly granted to Slaughter-House violated several provisions of the Constitution.

Issue
Did the statute create an involuntary servitude, deny to Plaintiffs the equal protection of the laws, or deprive Plaintiffs of property without due process of the law?<br />	Did the statute abridge the Privileges and Immunities of citizens of the United States in violation of the Fourteenth Amendment?

Held
No as to each charge of Issue a and no as to Issue b.

Dissent
Justice Stephen Field (J. Field) stated that if the Privileges and Immunities Clause refers only to such rights as were specially designated in the Constitution or as necessarily implied as belonging to citizens of the United States, it was an enactment that accomplished nothing.<br />	Justice Joseph Bradley (J. Bradley) argued that the granting of monopolies to individuals or corporations is an invasion of the right of others to choose a lawful calling, and thus, an infringement of personal liberty.<br />

Discussion
Since the Slaughter-House cases, the Privileges and Immunities clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution has seldom been invoked as a basis for a cause of action against constitutional violations. It is significant to note the list of rights that J. Miller says the clause protects, e.g., the right of free access to the seaports, the right to demand the care of the Federal government over his life, liberty and property when on the high seas or within the jurisdiction of a foreign government. Whether the Privileges and Immunities Clause should be read narrowly so as to protect the few rights J. Miller attributes to it is debatable. The Supreme Court will later incorporate several amendments of the United States Bill of Rights into the Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution. Had the Supreme Court here applied the “Incorporation Doctrine,” this case would have come out differently.

