Citation
22 Ill.374 S.W.2d 119 (Mo. 1963)

Brief Fact Summary
The Defendant, Brookshire/Miller (Defendant) appealed from affirmation of a sheriff’s execution and sale which sold the Defendant’s $50,000 property to satisfy a $2,000 judgment.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A judgment debtor is to be afforded reasonable protection in levying on and selling his property under execution.

Facts
The Plaintiff, Griggs (Plaintiff), purchased a 322 acre farm for $20,600 at a public sale under a general execution against the Defendant. The Plaintiff sued the Defendant in ejectment for withholding possession of the farm and for damages. The Defendant’s answer was a general denial and he counterclaimed to set aside the sheriff’s execution sale and deed. The court found for the Plaintiff and assessed $2,483.24 in damages for the Defendant’s withholding of the farm. The decree also stated that the Plaintiff would recover $250 a month from the date of the judgment for so long as the Defendant withheld the farm from the Plaintiff. Miller replaced Brookshire as party-litigant Defendant after Brookshire was incarcerated.

Issue
Whether it was error to sell the Defendant’s entire 322 acre farm without attempting to make the judgment debt, interest and costs out of a portion of the farm.

Held
Yes. Defendant is entitled to relief upon his performance of equity. The sheriff’s sale and sheriff’s deed made to Plaintiff was canceled. The Defendant had thirty days to deposit in court the sum of $20,600.

Discussion
Missouri Civil Rule 76.21 stated that if a judgment debtor gives the officer a list of his property sufficient to satisfy the execution, then the officer shall levy upon the property and no other, if in his opinion, it is sufficient. If not, then the officer will levy upon additional property as shall be sufficient. Civil Rule 76.24 further stated that when an execution is levied upon real estate, the officer levying it shall divide the property and if so, sell as much of it as necessary to satisfy the judgment, unless the debtor desires the whole tract of land or lot to be sold together. The general rule, therefore, was that the execution officer could make a division of the property and if practicable, sell only as much of it as necessary to satisfy the judgment.

