Citation
384 Mich. 4, 179 N.W.2d 390, 1970 Mich.

Brief Fact Summary
The Defendant, LaCroix (Defendant), wrecked his car shearing off a utility pole and creating an electrical explosion at the Plaintiffs, the Daleys’ house (Plaintiffs). Plaintiffs claimed, in addition to property damage, that two family members suffered severe emotional disturbance as a result of the accident. The trial court granted a directed verdict on the ground that Michigan law denies recovery for emotional disturbance without a showing of physical impact.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Michigan courts now recognize an action for negligently caused emotional disturbance regardless of a showing of physical impact.

Facts
On July 16, 1963 the Defendant was driving near the Plaintiffs’ farm when his vehicle left the highway, traveled 63 feet in the air, and sheared off a utility pole. Several high voltage lines snapped, striking the electrical lines leading into Plaintiffs’ house and causing a great electrical explosion. The Plaintiffs claimed, in addition to property damage, that Estelle Daley suffered traumatic neurosis, emotional disturbance and nervous upset and that Timothy Daley suffered emotional disturbance and nervousness as a result of the explosion. The Court of Appeals affirmed the trial court’s grant of a directed verdict on the ground that Michigan law denies recovery for negligently caused emotional disturbance absent a showing of physical impact.

Issue
Should Michigan continue to require some impact upon the person in order to recover for negligently caused emotional disturbance?

Held
No. Reversed and remanded.

Dissent
This is not a case where it is appropriate to adopt a new rule of law. Plaintiffs in this case suffered, if anything, an indefinite and subjective injury. The dissenting judge would affirm the trial court’s grant of directed verdict.

Discussion
In the past, compensation had been allowed for emotional disturbance without physical impact in limited circumstances, such as the negligent mishandling of corpses.

