Citation
155 N.J. 330, 714 A.2d 924, 1998 N.J.

Brief Fact Summary
A neighbor sexually abused two young girls and admitted to the abuse. As part of a tort action, the parents of the girls brought suit against the wife of the abuser, claiming that her negligence was a cause of the abuse. The wife answered by claiming that she owed no duty to the girls and if she did her actions were not a proximate cause of their injuries.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A spouse owes a duty to prevent sexual abuse by his or her spouse if they have actual knowledge or a special reason to know that the spouse is likely to abuse or is abusing an identifiable victim. Failure to act on this duty is a proximate cause of the minor’s injuries.

Facts
Two young girls, ages twelve and fifteen, spent considerable amounts of time with their neighbor at his horse barn. The neighbor sexually abused both girls for more than a year. After the neighbor’s conviction and imprisonment, the Plaintiffs, the girls, along with their parents (Plaintiffs), brought this action against the Defendants, the neighbor and his wife (Defendants), for damages. Plaintiffs claimed that the wife’s negligence rendered her liable for the girls’ injuries. The husband conceded liability. The wife denied she could be found negligent. The wife claimed she owed no duty to the Plaintiffs and that any negligence on her part was not the proximate cause of injuries sustained by the Plaintiffs. The trial court entered summary judgment on behalf of the Defendants. On appeal, the Appellate Division reversed the order and remanded, granting the Plaintiffs extended discovery. The Supreme Court of New Jersey granted Defendants’ petition for certification.

Issue
Did the wife owe Plaintiffs a duty to ensure they were not sexually abused by her husband, and if so, can her negligence be considered a proximate cause of their injuries?

Held
Yes. Judgment of the Appellate Division affirmed.

Discussion
Issues involving foreseeability and proximate causation are often closely entwined with similar facts being used to prove or disprove each.

