Citation
97 N.J. 339, 478 A.2d 755 (1984).

Brief Fact Summary
The Plaintiff, Peter Procanik (Plaintiff), was born with multiple birth defects, the result of his mother’s German Measles that the Defendants, Dr. Cillo and other doctors (Defendants), negligently failed to diagnose. Plaintiff sued Defendants claiming general damages for emotional distress and for an impaired childhood because the Defendants negligently deprived his parents of the choice of terminating the pregnancy. Plaintiff also claims special damages for the extraordinary medical expenses he will incur.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
An infant plaintiff may recover special damages for the extraordinary medical expenses he will incur, but may not recover general damages for emotional distress or for an impaired childhood.

Facts
During the first trimester of Mrs. Procanik’s pregnancy with the Plaintiff, she consulted the Defendants who informed her that she had been recently been diagnosed with measles. He ordered a test for German measles and the resulted were indicative of a past infection of Rubella. The Defendants negligently interpreted these results and told Mrs. Procanik that she had become immune to German Measles as a child. Actually, the past infection disclosed by the test was the German Measles that caused Mrs. Procanik to consult Defendants. Mrs. Procanik allowed her pregnancy to continue, not realizing that an accurate diagnosis of German Measles during pregnancy was likely to result in congenital rubella syndrome for her unborn child. Plaintiff was born with multiple birth defects. Plaintiff brought suit, claiming that the doctors negligently deprived his parents of the choice of terminating the pregnancy. He requested general damages for his pain and suffering and for his parents’ impa

Issue
May an infant recover general damages for emotional distress or for an impaired childhood caused by a doctor’s negligent deprivation of his parent’s choice of terminating the pregnancy?

Held
No. Yes. Judgment of the Appellate Division is affirmed in part, reversed in part, and the matter is remanded.

Discussion
Unlike wrongful death suits for unborn child, few jurisdictions allow actions for wrongful

