Citation
752 F.2d 1019, cert. denied, 477 U.S. 903 (5th Cir.1985).

Brief Fact Summary
Two ships collided, causing toxic chemicals to be released into the environment and causing the United States Coast Guard (Coast Guard) to close a Mississippi River outlet. Numerous lawsuits were filed by those affected by the closing of the outlet. The district court granted a motion for summary judgment on all claims for economic loss unaccompanied by physical damage to property.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The majority rule does not allow recovery for economic loss, unless physical damage to property occurs.

Facts
On the evening of July 22, 1980, the M/V Sea Daniel, an inbound bulk carrier, and the M/V Testbank, an outbound container ship, collided on the Mississippi River. Containers aboard the Testbank were damaged and lost overboard. During the wreck, hydrobromic acid and pentachlorophenol (PCP), were released into the environment. The Coast Guard closed the outlet until August 10, 1980 and all fishing, shrimping and related activities were temporarily suspended. Numerous lawsuits representing the affected parties were filed and consolidated before the same judge in the Eastern District of Louisiana. Defendants moved for summary judgment on all claims for economic loss unaccompanied by physical damage to property. The district court granted the summary judgment and on appeal a panel of this court affirmed. Judge Wisdom specially concurred urging reexamination en banc, with which the court agreed.

Issue
Is physical damage to a proprietary interest still a prerequisite to recovery for economic loss in cases of unintentional maritime tort?

Held
Yes. Decision of district court granting summary judgment to defendants on all claims for economic losses unaccompanied by physical damage is affirmed.

Dissent
Circuit Judge Wisdom, with whom Rubin, Politz, Tate and Johnson, Circuit Judges, join:

Discussion
This case represents the clear American majority rule, but disagreement persists.

