Citation
17 Cal. 3d 425, 551 P.2d 334, 131 Cal. Rptr. 14, 1976 Cal.

Brief Fact Summary
Posenjit Poddar (Mr. Poddar), the patient of the Defendants, four psychiatrists (Defendants), threatened to kill the Plaintiffs, Mr. and Mrs. Tarasoff’s (Plaintiffs) daughter, Tatiana Tarasoff (Tatiana). Mr. Poddar was briefly detained, but then released. Mr. Poddar did in fact kill Tatiana. The Plaintiffs filed suit claiming that Defendants should be liable for Tatiana’s death because they failed to warn her or them about the patient’s threat.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Once a therapist determines or should have determined that the patient poses a serious danger of violence, he bears a duty to exercise reasonable care to protect the foreseeable victim of the danger.

Facts
Mr. Poddar was a patient of Dr. Lawrence Moore (Dr. Moore), at Cowell Memorial Hospital of the University of California. Dr. Moore was one of the four Defendants. During one of their sessions, Mr. Poddar informed Dr. Moore that he intended to kill Tatiana because she turned down his romantic advances. Dr. Moore had the campus police detain Mr. Poddar, but he was released shortly thereafter. Despite a disagreement between the psychiatrists at the hospital, no further action was taken to detain Mr. Poddar. Two months later, Mr. Poddar shot and repeatedly stabbed Tatiana, killing her. The Plaintiffs brought a wrongful death suit against the Defendants who failed to detain Mr. Poddar. The court rejected the contention that Defendants could be liable for this inaction because California Government Code Section 856 provided tort immunity with regard to these decisions. Plaintiffs also claimed Defendants should be liable for Tatiana’s death because they failed to warn her or them abo

Issue
Are Defendants liable if it is found that their negligent failure to warn Tatiana or others proximately situated, resulted in the death of Tatiana?

Held
Yes. Leave to amend complaint to state a cause of action against Defendants for breach of duty to exercise reasonable care to protect Tatiana.

Discussion
The “reasonable degree of skill, knowledge and care ordinarily possessed” standard is the same as that generally applied to malpractice cases for professionals.

