Citation
48 Cal. 3d 644, 771 P.2d 814, 257 Cal. Rptr. 865, 1989 Cal.

Brief Fact Summary
The Plaintiff, Maria Thing’s (Plaintiff) son was struck by an automobile and injured. Plaintiff did not witness the accident, but arrived at the scene shortly thereafter. Plaintiff sued the Defendant, James La Chusa (Defendant), for negligent infliction of emotional distress.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The California Supreme Court has ruled that a plaintiff must be present when an injury occurs and be closely related to the injured party to recover damages for a claim of negligent infliction of emotional distress.

Facts
On December 8, 1980, John Thing, a minor, was struck by an automobile operated by the Defendant. The Plaintiff, John Thing’s mother was nearby, but neither saw nor heard the accident. Plaintiff’s daughter informed her of the injury to her son. Plaintiff rushed to the scene, where she found her son bloody and unconscious. Plaintiff sued the Defendant, alleging she suffered great emotional disturbance, shock and injury to her nervous system as a result of the emotional stress she suffered. Plaintiff also alleged that these injuries were proximately caused by the Defendant’s negligence. The court granted Defendant’s motion for summary judgment ruling as a matter of law that Plaintiff could not establish a claim for negligent infliction of emotional distress because she did not contemporaneously and sensorily perceive the accident. The Court of Appeals overruled the trial court’s grant of summary judgment.

Issue
Did the Court of Appeal correctly hold that a mother who did not witness a car accident in which her son was injured could recover damages for the emotional distress she suffered when she arrived at the accident scene?

Held
No. The Judgment of the Court of Appeal is reversed.

Discussion
A similar cause of action, intentional infliction of emotional distress, is punitive in nature rather than negligent infliction of emotional distress, which is compensatory.

