Citation
Mont. Sup. Ct., 2009 MT 449, 354 Mont. 234, 224 P.3d 1211 (2009)

Brief Fact Summary
Robert Baxter (Plaintiff) was terminally ill and seeking a lethal dose of medication prescribed by his doctor to assist in his own suicide.  Baxter (Plaintiff), and his doctors (Plaintiff), filed suit seeking to prevent prosecution for physician-assisted suicide.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Under the privacy and dignity provisions of the Montana Constitution, a right to die with dignity exists, including a physician's assistance in dying.

Facts
Robert Baxter (Plaintiff) was a retired truck driver who was diagnosed as terminally ill with lymphocytic leukemia.  Baxter (Plaintiff) sought to end his life by self-administering and ingesting a legal dose of medication his doctor would prescribe.  Baxter (Plaintiff) and his doctors (Plaintiff) brought suit against the State (Defendant) to protect the doctors from criminal prosecution for assisting in the proposed suicide.  The district court held that under the Montana Constitution, a competent, terminally ill patient has a right to die with dignity and that includes protecting the patient's doctor from prosecution under the state's homicide statutes.  The district court concluded that state's homicide laws were unconstitutional as applied to a doctor who provides assistance to a competent, terminally ill patient in dying.  Defendant appealed.

Issue
Under the privacy and dignity provisions of the Montana Constitution, does a right to die with dignity exist, including a physician's assistance in dying?

Held
(Leaphart, J.)  Yes.  Under the privacy and dignity provisions of the Montana Constitution, a right to die with dignity exists, including a physician's assistance in dying.  This court begins with the proposition that suicide is not a crime under state law.  In the aid-in-dying situation, the only person who might possibly be prosecuted for criminal behavior is the doctor who prescribes a lethal dose of medication.  Because the claims of the Plaintiff's doctors (Plaintiff) are premised largely upon concerns that they could be prosecuted for assisting in dying, the court deems it appropriate to analyze their possible culpability for homicide by examining whether the consent of the patient to his doctor's assistance in dying could constitute a statutory defense to a homicide charge against the doctor.

Dissent
(Rice, J.)  The prohibition against homicide—intentionally causing the death of another—protects and preserves human life, is the ultimate recognition of human dignity, and is a foundation for modern society, as it has been for thousands of years.  Based on this foundation, Anglo-American law, encompassing the law of the State, has prohibited the enabling of suicide for over 700 years.  However, in contradiction to these fundamental principles, the court concludes that physician-assisted suicide is not in violation of state public policy.  In doing so, the court has badly misinterpreted our public policy.

Concurrence
(Nelson, J.)  I concur in the court's analysis and further conclude that physician assistance in dying is protected by the Montana Constitution as a matter of privacy and a matter of individual dignity.  The Montana Constitution also firmly protects physician assistance in dying.  This case is not about the "right to die."  Indeed, the notion that there is such a "right" is patently absurd, if not downright silly.  No constitution, statute, legislature, or court can grant a person the "right to die."  Nor can this right be taken away.  "Death is the destiny of everything that lives.  Nothing ever escapes it."  Within the context of this case, the only control that a person has over death is that if he expects its coming within a relatively short period of time because of an incurable disease, he can simply accept his fate and seek drug-induced comfort; or he can seek additional treatment and right to prolong the advance of death; or at some point in his illness, and with the assistance of his doctor, he can embrace the destiny at a time and place of his choosing.  The only "right" guaranteed to him in any of these decisions is the right to preserve his personal autonomy and his individual dignity, as he sees fit, in the face of an ultimate destiny that no power on earth can prevent.

Discussion
Baxter (Plaintiff) and his doctors (Plaintiff) brought suit against the State (Defendant) to prevent prosecution for assisting in his decision to end his life.  The lower court's decision confirming his right to physician-assisted suicide came on the same day as Plaintiff's death.  The appeal concluded when the state's highest court affirmed Baxter's (Plaintiff) right and the protection of his doctors (Plaintiff) from criminal prosecution.  At odds were the competing religious, moral, and ethical concerns about seemingly legalizing suicide.  The majority determined that suicide itself was not a crime, and distinguished the right to die by physician-assisted suicide from criminal liability under the state's homicide statutes.  The significance of the decision was to permit terminally ill patients the right to seek their doctor's assistance.  The concurring and dissenting decisions reveal that there are still unresolved issues as to whether or not the legislature intended the majority's holding, by providing an exception to a homicide prosecution that was otherwise successful.

