Citation
22 Ill.467 U.S. 229, 104 S. Ct. 2321, 81 L. Ed. 2d 186 (1984)

Brief Fact Summary
This case involved a constitutional challenge to a Hawaii law under which property held in fee simple by just a few people was condemned and sold to lessees of the property in order to re-distribute the fee simples on the island. The Fifth Amendment of the United States Constitution provides that “private property shall not be taken for public use without just compensation.”

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The mere fact that property taken outright by eminent domain is transferred in the first instance to private beneficiaries does not condemn that taking as having only a private purpose.

Facts
Historically, Hawaii was settled by Polynesian immigrants who developed an economy around a feudal land tenure system, the result of which was to concentrate land ownership in the hands of a few. In 1967, the Hawaii legislature enacted the Land Reform Act of 1967 (Act), which created a mechanism for condemning residential tracts and for transferring ownership of the condemned fee simples to the existing lessees. If 25 eligible tenants of at least half the tenants on a five acre or more residential tract request that their homes be condemned, then the Hawaii Housing Authority (HHA) is authorized to hold a public hearing to determine if the proposed condemnation will effectuate the public purposes of the Act, and if the HHA find the public purposes will be served, then HHA is authorized to designate some of the tracts for acquisition. The prices are set by condemnation trial or by negotiation between lessors and lessees. HHA then acquires the land of the former fee owners’ full

Issue
Is the Act constitutional?

Held
Yes. The court of appeals decision is reversed.

Discussion
Note the broad authority of the legislative body. So long as the purpose of any act, which includes eminent domain is legitimate and the means to achieve the purpose are not irrational, the act will withstand constitutional scru

