Citation
22 Ill.277 U.S. 183, 48 S. Ct. 447, 72 L. Ed. 842 (1928)

Brief Fact Summary
The Plaintiff sued for a mandatory injunction directing the city to pass Plaintiff’s application for a permit to erect any lawful buildings upon a tract of land without regard to the inclusion of the tract of land in a zoning ordinance, which zoned the land residential.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The determination of public officers should not be set aside unless it is clear that their action has no foundation in reason and is a mere arbitrary or irrational exercise of power having no substantial relation to the public health, the public morals, the public safety or the public welfare.

Facts
The Plaintiff sued for a mandatory injunction, based on alleged unconstitutionality of a zoning ordinance as depriving Plaintiff of property without due process of law, directing the city to pass an application of the Plaintiff for a permit to erect any lawful buildings upon a tract of land without regard to the inclusion of the tract of land in a zoning ordinance, which zoned the land residential. The land in question is 140,000 square feet that was zoned as residential despite being surrounded by land belonging to the Ford Motor Company and the Boston & Albany Railroad. Opposite of the tract there are some residences, which are in the same district. Before the passage of the ordinance in question, the Plaintiff had a contract to sell the greater part of the entire tract for $63,000. Because of the restriction, the buyer backed out of the deal. The master appointed to the case found that no practical use can be made of Plaintiff’s land under the ordinance and that the zoning

Issue
Is the zoning ordinance constitutional as applied to Plaintiff’s land?

Held
No. Judgment reversed.

Discussion
This case further illustrates the requirements for a zoning ordinance and also the standard of review of the ordinance itself. The student should be aware of the basic requirements of the purpose of a zoning ordinance.

