Citation
22 Ill.2 Wis. 2d 365, 86 N.W.2d 469 (1957)

Brief Fact Summary
Green Bay, Wisconsin adopted an official map of the city showing established and proposed streets. The Plaintiff owned land, which was leased to Clark Oil and Refining Corporation for use as a service station. Immediately next to the service station, Plaintiff requested a building permit to build a restaurant, but the proposed building lay within a proposed roadway under the official map adopted in 1947, by the city.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The objective of the statute, which authorizes cities to adopt official maps and place proposed streets thereon, and upon which no building permits may be granted, includes the promotion of orderly city growth and development so as to prevent the haphazard erection of buildings.

Facts
In 1953, the realtor applied to Manders (Defendant), a building inspector, for a permit to build a drive-in service lunch stand on the property, which was next to the service station. The building inspector refused the application. The realtor appealed to the zoning and planning board of appeals. The realtor challenged the constitutionality of the city ordinance, which established the official map pursuant to statute. The board of appeals, after a hearing, sustained the building inspector’s denial of the application. The realtor then sued for a Writ of Mandamus to compel issuance of the building permit. The lower court found that the statute authorizing an official map and the ordinance adopting the official map were constitutional. The court dismissed the proceedings. The realtor appealed.

Issue
Is the official map law and the ordinance adopting the Green Bay official map unconstitutional as a taking by the city of the realtor’s property for public use without just compensation?

Held
No. Affirmed.

Discussion
This case is of particular importance in jurisdictions, which have an official map law. If the realtor was allowed to build his lunch stand, his financial stake in the property would be increased. Therefore, when the city finally institutes eminent domain proceedings, the value of the property would be higher, the cost of which would pass to the taxpayers.

