Citation
493 U.S. 549,110 S. Ct. 900,107 L. Ed. 2d 992,1990 U.S.

Brief Fact Summary
Petitioner was ordered by the court to produce her child, who was deemed a child in need of assistance.  Petitioner refused based upon the Fifth Amendment protection against self-incrimination.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The court may properly request production and return of the child, and enforce this through the contempt power, for reasons related entirely to the child’s well-being and through measures unrelated to the criminal law.

Facts
Petitioner Maurice M. was an abused trial.  He was hospitalized at 3 months with a fractured femur, and examination revealed several other partially healed bone fractures.  Respondent Bouknight, petitioner’s mother, was observed in the hospital shaking petitioner and dropping him in his crib.  Hospital personnel notified Baltimore City Department of Social Services (BCDSS).  BCDSS secured a court order removing petitioner from respondent’s control and placing him in a shelter care.  He was later returned to respondent’s custody subject to conditions.  Eight months later, BCDSS related that respondent would not cooperate with them and had violated the terms of the protective order.  They stated that petitioner’s father had recently died in a shooting accident, and that respondent could not provide adequate care for petitioner based upon a psychological examination and her history of drug use.  BCDSS officials also petitioned for judicial relief from respondent’s failure to prod

Issue
May a mother invoke the Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination to resist an order of the juvenile court to produce her child?

Held
The court may properly request production and return of the child, and enforce this through the contempt power.

Discussion
The Court held that the respondent could not ignore a court order demanding production of her child based upon the Fifth Amendment, but the use of the testimonial aspects of this production may be limited in subsequent criminal proceedings.

