Citation
742 A.2d 190 (Pa. Super. Ct. 1999)

Brief Fact Summary
Appellant challenged the trial court’s entry of a protection order based upon his corporal punishment of his daughter.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Pennsylvania law includes a parental privilege against criminal claims that involve corporal punishment.  Such a privilege should be read in congruence with the PFA requirements.

Facts
Appellant administered corporal punishment on his sixteen-year-old daughter in the form of hitting her four to five times across the buttocks with a folded belt for lying.  The daughter testified that the punishment was painful and made her cry.  She reported the incident to her older half-sister, who contacted CYS and reported the incident.  Later that evening appellant and his girlfriend had a discussion with the daughter regarding the rules of the house.  Shortly thereafter, appellant left the table and retrieved a pistil from the cupboard, looked at the gun, walked by his daughter and proceeded upstairs.  He testified that he had remembered that he left the gun downstairs and retrieved it, checked to make sure it was unloaded, then took it upstairs where he stores his firearms.  The next day a Petition for Protection From Abuse [PFA] was filed.  The daughter testified regarding the facts and also being frightened and intimidated by the incident as well as by appellant’s st

Issue
Did the court err in finding that appellant’s actions resulted in a need for a PFA order?

Held
The trial court erred because appellant’s actions did not constitute abuse under the statute.

Dissent
An accurate view of the record reveals appellant’s punishment was severe enough to cause bruising and that he handled her severely enough to leave imprints from his hands on her body.  This, in addition to appellant’s need to remove his gun in his daughter’s presence warrants the protection from abuse order.  The majority fails to consider testimony from the daughter that she received a bruise on her thigh and handprints from being ht by her father.  The majority thereby disregards the trial court’s factual findings and its credibility determinations.  Nothing in the statute requires the pain to be of a continuing, it need only be substantial.

Discussion
The majority found that the evidence did not warrant a finding requiring the PFA order, particularly considering the criminal parental privilege regarding corporal punishment.  The dissent believed that the majority misinterpreted the evidence and disregarded the findings of fact of the trial court.

