Citation
461 N.W.2d 478,1990 Iowa App.

Brief Fact Summary
Appellant challenged a juvenile court’s finding that her child was a child in need of assistance based primarily on appellant’s extremely dirty apartment, which included animal feces on the floor.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The majority found that removal from the mother’s house was warranted based on the extreme squalor found at the apartment and the potential harm that could arise from such squalor.

Facts
Appellant appeals the adjudication of the juvenile court determining N.M.W. to be a child in need of assistance (CINA) and the subsequent order directing continuing foster care of her.  The child in question was born in 1983 and lived with her mother from birth until 1989.  The Department of Human Services became involved as early as 1984, filing several abuse reports.  The primary concerns were extreme filth in the home, inadequate food in the home, inadequate supervision of the child and refusal of services by the mother.  In April, 1989 the child was found in front of a house a block from the mother’s residence.  Police were unable to locate her home, and she told authorities at the police station that her mother had told her to go outside.  Based on this situation a child protective worker visited the mother’s apartment, where she found a stench of cat feces and urine, the house strewn with garbage, clothing, and other clutter, and a total of eleven to twelve cats living a

Issue
Did the trial court err in finding the existence of sufficient evidence to establish N.M.W. as a child in need of assistance?

Held
The record demonstrates clear and convincing evidence to support the juvenile court’s determination that N.M.W. is a child in need of assistance.

Dissent
The reason for the removal is that the mother is an inadequate housekeeper and does not keep what the majority terms a sanitary house.  I agree that it is in the child’s best interests to live in an cleaner house, but the house could have been cleaned without taking the child from her mother.  I do not believe that removal was in the child’s best interests.  Furthermore, the majority decision is concerning because it could present precedent for setting standards for housekeeping that need to be met before we allow parents to keep their children.

Discussion
The majority based its decision on the health concerns related to the squalor found at the mother’s apartment, while the dissent argued that measures should have been taken to have the house cleaned without removal of the child.

