Citation
189 Conn. 276,455 A.2d 1313,1983 Conn.38 A.L.R.4th 736

Brief Fact Summary
Defendant appealed the court’s decision to temporarily remove her children after her youngest child passed away from unknown causes.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Due to the fundamental interest of a parent in raising their children a showing of serious physical illness, or serious physical injury, or immediate physical danger must be demonstrated before children may be removed from a family.

Facts
Defendant and her six children lived in a small apartment in New Haven.  They had been receiving protective service family services and support from the Aid to Families with Dependent Children program.  A caseworker assigned to the family visited defendant’s home twenty-seven times.  She considered the family situation marginal, but noted that the children were not abused or neglected and were happy and active, enjoying a warm relationship with their mother.  Defendant’s youngest child died during the night and no cause of death could be determined, but the pediatrician noted some unexplained superficial marks on the child’s back.  Plaintiff, commissioner of children and youth services seized custody of defendant’s remaining children because of the unexplained death.  Family services filed petitions of neglect for each of the children, alleging the unexplained death, that defendant’s apartment was dirty with numerous roaches, that defendant had been observed drinking beer and

Issue
Does a Connecticut statute permitting temporary seizure of defendant’s children violate the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment both because it is an impermissible infringement on defendant’s right to family integrity, and because the statute is unconstitutionally vague?

Held
The statute is constitutional, but the court erred because there was no showing of serious physical illness, or serious physical injury, or immediate physical danger to warrant removing the children from defendant.

Discussion
The Court found that the statute was constitutional because it should be read to require a showing of serious physical illness, or serious physical injury, or immediate physical danger before children may be removed from a family.

