Citation
929 F. Supp. 662,1996 U.S. Dist.

Brief Fact Summary
Plaintiffs, 11 children who suffered from abuse and neglect under the New York Children’s services, brought suit seeking injunctive and declaratory relief based on a variety of claims.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Three factors are used to determine if a federal statute permits a private right of action: 1) whether the provision was intended to benefit plaintiff; 2) whether the provision reflects a congressional preference for a kind of conduct rather than a binding obligation; 3) whether the interest asserted is so vague and amorphous as to be beyond the competence of the judiciary to enforce.

Facts
Plaintiffs are 11 children whom all suffered, and some continue to be at risk of, severe abuse and neglect.  They allege that respondents, officials with responsibility for the Child Welfare Administration of the City of New York (CWA) now renamed the New York City Administration for Children’s Services (ACS), mishandled plaintiffs’ cases and deprived plaintiffs of their rights under the state and federal constitutions, as well as under numerous federal and state statutes.  The children were severely neglected and abused, with knowledge of such abuse being made to the CWA.  Plaintiffs brought this action pursuant to 42 U.S.C. Section:1983 seeking injunctive or declaratory relief and alleging violations of the Constitution, the Adoption Assistance and Child Welfare Act, Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act (CAPTA), and Americans with Disabilities Act.

Issue
Are defendants entitled to have their motion to dismiss plaintiffs’ action granted?

Held
Defendants are entitled to have any claim that they have a substantive due process right to least restrictive, optimal placement dismissed, but all other claims may be maintained.

Discussion
The main point of this decision is to demonstrate the applicable standard to determine when a Plaintiff has a private right of action under a Federal Statutory claim.

