Brief Fact Summary
Appellants challenged their convictions for failure to report an incident of child abuse by child care custodians based on their counseling of a sexually abused child.  Appellants were pastors in a church and school administrators at the church’s school.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Religious counselors may properly be convicted for failure to report child abuse when their role also involves school related counseling.

Facts
At trial, the victim, 20 year old Christine, testified that she had attended South Bay Christian Academy.  At 17 she sought help from appellant Hodges (president of the school and pastor of the church) by telling him that her stepfather, a minister in the church, had been molesting her for many years.  Hodges informed her stepfather of the allegations, and told Christine the next day that her stepfather had confessed to everything, that he would be handling the situation, and that she should not tell anyone.  A few days later, Hodges told Christine that he had sent her stepfather to a retreat and handed her a letter of apology from her stepfather.  He insisted on having her mother and stepfather come into the office after she read the letter against her wishes.  She pleaded with Mr. Hodges to not make her go home with her parents because she was frightened of her stepfather, but he arranged to have her parents pick her up from school the next day.  Instead, she ran away.  She

Issue
Were appellants properly convicted of violating the Child Abuse and Neglect Reporting Act, which provides that any child care custodian who has knowledge of or observes a child in his or her professional capacity or within the scope of his or her employment whom he or she knows or reasonably suspects has been the victim of child abuse shall report the known or suspected instance of child abuse to a child protective agency immediately or as soon as practically possible?

Held
The jury’s decision that appellants were acting within the capacity of a child care custodian was upheld.  The constitutionality of the act as applied to the appellants was also valid.

Discussion
This case discusses the difference between appellants acting in a pastoral role in the church and a child care custodian role in the school.  The Court finds the jury justified in finding that appellants acted in a child care custodian role, and that application of the act to appellants was constitutional.

