Citation
455 U.S. 745,102 S. Ct. 1388,71 L. Ed. 2d 599,1982 U.S.

Brief Fact Summary
Petitioner parents challenged the constitutionality of a New York statute permitting permanent termination of parental rights based upon a preponderance of the evidence standard.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment requires more than a preponderance of the evidence standard in a termination of parental rights hearing.

Facts
Petitioners John II and Annie Santosky were the natural parents of Tina and John III.  After incidents reflecting parental neglect, respondent Kramer initiated a neglect proceeding and had Tina removed from the home.  10 months later John III was placed with foster parents.  On the same day Annie gave birth to a third child, Jed.  Respondent transferred Jed to a foster home when he was three days old.  In October 1978 respondent petitioned the court to terminate petitioner’s parental rights.  Petitioners challenged the applicable preponderance standard, and the Family Court rejected this constitutional standard.  The court found that the Santosky’s had maintained contact with the children, but found the visits to be at best superficial.  The court determined the agency had made diligent efforts to encourage and strengthen the parental relationship, and concluded the Santoskys were incapable of planning for the future of their children.  The judge ruled that the best interests

Issue
Is the New York statute permitting the State to terminate the rights of parents in their natural child upon a finding that the State has proved by a preponderance of the evidence that the child is permanently neglected constitutional?

Held
The Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment requires more than a preponderance of the evidence standard in a termination of parental rights hearing.

Dissent
New York has created an exhaustive program to assist parents in regaining child custody.  Petitioners received training, and the State spent more than $15,000 in efforts to rehabilitate petitioners.  Petitioners’ response was marginal at best.  They wholly disregarded some of the available services and participated sporadically in others.  The State moved for permanent termination based on growing concern over the length of children’s stay in foster care.  The State participated in a 4-year effort to reunite the family, and petitioners were accorded procedures and protections traditionally required by due process of law.  On one side is the interest of parents in a continuation of the family unit.  On the other side is the often countervailing interests of the child.  In addition, the State has an urgent interest in the welfare of the child.  A State may accordingly conclude that the risk of error should be borne in a roughly equal fashion by use of the preponderance standard

Discussion
The majority based their decision on concerns that erroneous parental termination was of more concern than erroneous failure to terminate.  The dissent found the preponderance standard constitutional because the two interests could correctly be considered to be equally balanced.

