Citation
431 U.S. 816,97 S. Ct. 2094,53 L. Ed. 2d 14,1977 U.S.

Brief Fact Summary
Appellees foster parents brought suit claiming that the procedures governing the removal of foster children from foster homes violated the Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses of the Constitution.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Consideration of the private interest affected; the risk of an erroneous deprivation of such interest by the procedures; and, the government’s interest requires the conclusion that those procedures satisfy constitutional standards.

Facts
Appellees, individual foster parents and an organization of foster parents, brought a civil rights class action on their own behalf and on behalf of children for whom they have provided homes for a year or more.  They sought declaratory and injunctive relief alleging that the procedures governing the removal of foster children from foster homes violated the Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses.  A group of natural mothers of children in foster care intervened on behalf of themselves and others similarly situated.  The district court determined that the preremoval procedures were an unconstitutional deprivation of due process by denying the foster child a hearing before transfer to another foster home or return to their natural parents.

Issue
Did the court correctly conclude that the New York procedures governing the removal of foster children from foster homes were an unconstitutional deprivation of due process by denying the foster child a hearing before transfer to another foster home or return to their natural parents?

Held
The District Court erred in holding that the preremoval procedures presently employed by the State are constitutionally defective.

Concurrence
I would hold that the interests asserted by the appellees are not of a kind that the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment protects.  The goal of foster care is not to provide a permanent substitute or natural or adoptive parents, but to prepare the child for his return to his real parents or placement in a permanent adoptive home.  The development of close emotional ties between foster parents and a child may hinder the child’s ultimate adjustment, and provide a basis for the termination of the foster family relationship.  The foster parent relationship is State created, and should be ruled by the State.

Discussion
The did not address the question of if the foster parents had a protectable liberty interest, but rather determined the case based upon the finding that the procedures in place were constitutionally sufficient if a liberty interest existed.  The concurrence would have found no such protectable liberty interest.

