Citation
135 Ore. App. 332,899 P.2d 691,1995 Ore. App.

Brief Fact Summary
Mother gave birth to a child with special needs, and mother’s current mental limitations and situation limited her ability to care for the child.  Child services eventually petitioned the court for permanent termination of parental rights.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The court erred in finding by clear and convincing evidence that the child’s integration into mother’s home was improbable in the foreseeable future due to conditions unlikely to change, even though mother was willing to work towards being a more capable mother and child services failed to provide opportunities for this.

Facts
Appellant Michelle Brady gave birth to her daughter prematurely.  Her daughter suffered from life-threatening medical conditions, and was in the neonatal intensive care unit for the first 15 weeks of her life.  The mother was 18 at the time, and was of low average intelligence, exhibiting certain mental and psychological difficulties.  She was a homeless high school drop out when she met the child’s father, and their relationship was violate and periodically violent.  Despite this, mother visited child at the hospital daily and met with the nursing staff to discuss the child’s special needs.  Following an altercation between mother and father, hospital staff became concerned and contacted Children’s Services Division (CSD).  A CSD investigator contacted the parents and recommended they attend psychological evaluations and domestic violence groups.  CSD did not offer any other assistance or training.  A psychological evaluation of the mother revealed that she had sustained subs

Issue
Did the court err in determining that mother lacked the capacity to care for her special needs child?

Held
The court erred because the state failed to prove by clear and convincing evidence that the child’s integration into mother’s home was improbable in the foreseeable future due to conditions unlikely to change.

Discussion
The Court made no determination regarding the mother’s immediate ability to care for her child, but determined that the lower court erred in determining that the child’s integration into mother’s home was improbable in the foreseeable future due to conditions unlikely to change.

