Citation
502 U.S. 346,112 S. Ct. 736,116 L. Ed. 2d 848,1992 U.S.

Brief Fact Summary
Petitioner challenges the admissibility of hearsay declared admissible based on the spontaneous declaration and statement made in the course of receiving medical care exceptions to the hearsay rules.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The spontaneous declaration and statement made in the course of receiving medical care exceptions to the hearsay rules due not violate the Petitioner’s Sixth Amendment Confrontation Clause right.

Facts
Petitioner was convicted by a jury of aggravated criminal sexual assault, residential burglary, and unlawful restraint based upon the sexual assault of 4 year old S.G.  Testimony at trial established that S.G.’s babysitter, DeVore, witnessed petitioner leaving S.G.’s bedroom.  DeVore knew petitioner because he was a friend of S.G.’s mother.  S.G. told DeVore that petitioner had put his hand over her mouth, choked her, threatened to whip her if she screamed and touched her in the vaginal area.  Grigsby, S.G.’s mother, testified that her daughter appeared scared on her arrival and repeated the claims that she had told DeVore.  Grigsby called the police, and a few minutes later S.G. repeated her story to Officer Lewis, and within four hours to Reents, an emergency room nurse, and to Dr. Meizen.  During petitioner’s trial the State twice attempted to call S.G. as a witness but she experienced emotional difficulty.  The trial court neither made, nor was it asked to make, a finding

Issue
Did the trial court violate petitioner’s Sixth Amendment Confrontation Clause right by permitting the challenged testimony?

Held
The spontaneous declarations and statements made in the course of receiving medical care exceptions do not violate petitioner’s Confrontation Clause right.

Discussion
The Court upholds the spontaneous declarations and statements made in the course of receiving medical care hearsay exceptions in the face of petitioner’s argument that this hearsay violated his constitutional right to confront and cross examine witnesses testifying against him.

