Citation
22 Ill.116 N.J.L. 586, 31 Gummere 586, 186 A. 29 (Sup. Ct. 1936)

Brief Fact Summary
Defendant Rabinowitz leased store premises to Plaintiff Adrian to commence on a date certain, and after the payment of the first month’s rent by Plaintiff, the premises were not available due to a hold over tenant.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
When a lease term is to commence in the future, the lessor undertakes an implied duty to make the premises available and open to the lessee’s entry on the first day of the lease term.

Facts
On April 30, 1934, Defendant Rabinowitz leased store premises to Plaintiff Adrian, who intended to run a shoe store in the premises. The term of the lease was six months with an option to renew. The rent was to be paid in advance. Plaintiff paid the first month’s rent prior to the commencement of the lease term. The lease was to begin on June 15, 1934. When the lease was entered into between Plaintiff and Defendant, the premises were leased and occupied by another, who did not respond to the Defendant Rabinowitz’s notice to vacate on June 15. Thereafter, the Defendant deemed herself obliged to institute eviction proceedings against the hold over tenant which resulted in a judgment of removal, executed on July 7, 1934, and the Plaintiff took possession two days later. The Plaintiff then sued Defendant in two counts, the first being that Defendant breached an implied duty “to give and deliver possession” of the premises on the first day of the term of the lease and secondly, tha

Issue
Did the lease contract impose on the lessor a duty of putting the tenant in actual and legal possession of the premises at the beginning of the lease term?

Held
Yes, but the Judgment must be reversed on the basis that the lower court incorrectly computed the damages.

Discussion
Hold over tenants can be a great problem for landlords. It makes sense to create a duty for the landlord to promptly deliver possession of the premises because the prospective lessee has no direct legal rights against a hold over tenant, while the landlord does have such rights.

