Citation
22 Ill.2 N.J. 18, 65 A.2d 523 (1949)

Brief Fact Summary
This case involves a dispute as to whether certain fixtures placed by a tenant on a leased premises may be removed, or if the fixtures become the property of the landlord.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Trade fixtures are removable by the tenant so long as he remains in possession of the leasehold, provided they are removable without material damage to the premises, regardless of whether the tenant has preserved such a right in the lease.

Facts
In 1929, parents leased a five story brick building to their son, Fred Horns, who intended to operate a meat packing business therein. The lease was to begin September 1, 1929 and continue until six months after the last surviving parent died. The lease gave Fred the right to install a new front to the building and to alter the interior for use as a meat packing and sales business. Fred covenanted to keep the building “in as good and sufficient repair as it is the date of the execution hereof” [September 1, 1929]. At the end of the term, Fred covenanted to deliver the premises and its fixtures in as good a condition, minus regular depreciation, as the date of the execution hereof, or September 1, 1929. Fred was given the option to purchase the premises at any time prior to the end of the lease with $75,000, which he did not exercise. Fred installed a large refrigeration system in the building such that each floor above the first was entirely a cold storage facility with meat r

Issue
May the tenant in possession remove the trade fixtures?

Held
Yes. So long as the removal does not cause damage to the premises. Case remanded for a determination of what may be removed.

Discussion
The Court here appeared to be swayed by the evidence that the original lease and the subsequent lease did not specifically prohibit the removal of trade fixtures. The effect of forcing the sale of the building with all the refrigeration equipment inside would be to essentially dispossess the Defendant of his business.

