Citation
22 Ill.261 Ga. 503, 405 S.E.2d 478 (1991)

Brief Fact Summary
This case is based on a lessor’s suit against a lessee of commercial realty, where the lessee discontinued its business prior to ending of the lease term and vacated the premises, but continued to pay the base rent and would not allow the sublease of the premises to another similar business.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
In the absence of any express or implied covenant of continuous operation in the lease, the Court will not substitute such a covenant when the intent of the parties is manifest in the plain language of the contract.

Facts
In 1963 the predecessor to the Appellee (lessor) and the Appellant (lessee) entered into a lease agreement where the lessor agreed to construct a supermarket for the lessee according to the lessee’s plans. The lessee drafted the lease which was to commence in 1964 for a term of 15 years, and called for an annual base rent of $29,053.00 as well as a percentage rent of annual gross sales exceeding $2,000,000. The lease was renewed in 1979 for an additional seven years, with options to renew for two additional three year terms. The lessee exercised both subsequent two year options, and after it was acquired by a new corporation, one month into the second term of three years, closed its store, vacated the premises and moved to a new shopping center belonging to the new corporate owner. The lessee continued to pay the annual base rent under the lease and refused to sublease the premises to another store, despite interest from other supermarkets. The lessor filed suit against the le

Issue
Does the lease contain any express or implied covenant of continuous operation such that the lease must terminate when the lessee discontinues its business on the premises?

Held
No. Judgment reversed.

Dissent
The dissent would hold that contract language provided that the lessee agreed to use the premises in any lawful business. Even though allowing the premises to sit vacant while paying rent is legal, it does not constitute a “lawful business.” Also, any ambiguity in contracts should be construed against the drafting party, here, the lessee.

Discussion
This case is an example of the necessity of re-drafting portions of leases from time to time. The lessor’s minimum base rent was at the level agreed to in 1964 some 28 years later. Of course, so long as the business was operated, the percentage rent of gross sales would climb, but the terms of the lease were unfavorable when the business discontinued.

