Citation
22 Ill.928 P.2d 368 (Utah 1996)

Brief Fact Summary
Plaintiff Richard Barton Enterprises (Barton) entered into a lease for commercial space in an office building with Defendant Tsern. The lease and “earnest money receipt” incorporated into the lease provided that rent was to be $3,000 per month and that the premises should be made available on December 1, 1991, and that lessor was required to fix a leaky roof and repair the freight elevator to “good working order.”

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The lessee’s covenant to pay rent is dependent on the lessor’s performance of covenants that were a significant inducement to the consummation of the lease or to the purpose for which the lessee entered into the lease.

Facts
On November 21, 1991, Plaintiff Barton and Defendant Tsern entered into an agreement titled “Earnest Money Receipt and Offer to Lease.” Then, on November 27, 1991, the parties entered into a lease for two floors of a commercial building, which provided for $3,000 per month rent and was for a term of one year to commence on December 1, 1991. The original earnest money receipt was incorporated into the lease and that term provided that the building was to be accepted in an “As is” condition except that Tsern agreed to fix the building’s leaky roof and repair the freight elevator to “good working order.” Plaintiff took possession of the lower floor on December 1, 1991, and took possession of the second floor on December 20, 1991, when a hold over tenant finally vacated the premises. The elevator was completely inoperable and Tsern had made no effort to get the elevator fixed, plus the roof still leaked. On January 9, 1992, Tsern hired Kimball Elevator Co. to repair the elevator s

Issue
Does an implied warranty of suitability for a particular purpose extend to commercial leases such as this one, which makes the obligation to pay rent dependent on the lessor’s obligation to maintain the premises?

Held
Yes. Affirmed [however, the trial court incorrectly computed damages].

Discussion
This case provides a good discussion of the evolution of landlord-tenant law with respect to abatement and the performance of covenants. These concepts are important to protect the rights of the tenant.

