Citation
22 Ill.3 P.3d 30 (Colo. 2000)

Brief Fact Summary
The Town of Telluride enacted an ordinance which was intended to provide affordable housing to employees of developments by requiring developers to create affordable housing for forty percent of employees generated by the development. This ordinance was challenged on the basis that it was a rent control, in violation of a statutory prohibition against rent control.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Where an ordinance of a town constitutes an attempt to control rent, in contravention of state law, the ordinance will not be enforceable.

Facts
The Town of Telluride enacted an ordinance (1011) which imposed an affordable housing requirement on new development. The ordinance requires developers to mitigate the effects of new development by providing affordable housing units for forty percent of the new employees generated by such development. The requirement is to create 350 square feet of housing space for forty percent of the proposed employees to a development. This requirement could be satisfied by 1. Constructing new units and deed- restricting them as affordable housing. 2. Deed-restricting “existing free market units” as affordable housing. 3. Pay fees in lieu of deed restricted housing. Or 4. Convey land to the Town of Telluride with a fair market value equivalent to the fee paid under the third option. Thereafter, the town enacted certain guidelines for affordable housing which stated that if the developer chooses either deed restriction option the guidelines will set maximum rental rates per square foot. The

Issue
Do the provisions of the ordinance and guidelines constitute an attempt at rent control in violation of the statute prohibiting rent control by municipalities?

Held
Yes. Judgment of the intermediate appellate court affirmed.

Discussion
This case is an example of the difficulties rapidly developing communities face. Rent control statutes, although not considered by this Court, are possibly not aimed at prohibiting the type of conduct in which the town engaged. However, when, as here, the meanings of the competing laws are clear, the state statute will take precedence over the local ordinance.

