Citation
2010 U.S. Dist.

Brief Fact Summary
A town refused to rezone to allow construction of a housing unit in which mostly minorities would reside.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
In a disparate impact suit brought under the Fair Housing Act (Act), an intent to discriminate is not needed to establish the plaintiff’s prima facie case. The plaintiff must only show a disproportionate impact or a segregate effect by the defendant’s actions. Then, the defendant has to show it could not achieve its goals with a less discriminatory alternative.

Facts
The Town of Huntington (Defendant) had a very small black population. A larger proportion of the black population requires subsidized housing than the white population. A disproportionately large percentage of families in existing subsidized projects are the minority. Under Defendant’s zoning ordinance, multi-family housing is permitted only in an R-3M district, where 52% of the residents are minority. In response to a need for subsidized housing, an organization decided to sponsor an integrated housing project for low-income families. The organization determined that the project could foster racial integration only if it were located in a white neighborhood. They found a suitable site, and sought to have the property rezoned so as to allow multi-family rental construction. The Town Board rejected any zoning change. The Huntington Branch of the NAACP (Plaintiffs) alleged that Defendant violated the Act by restricting private construction of multi-family housing and by refusing

Issue
When a town uses land in a way that has a disparate effect on a racial minority group, will that be enough for a violation of the Fair Housing Act?

Held
Yes.

Discussion
Under the Fair Housing Act, a plaintiff does not need to show that a defendant’s actions were intentionally discriminatory. Instead, an action that has a disparate effect will be enough to violate the statute, i.e., if the defendant did not have a legitimate government interest in his actions.

