Citation
430 U.S. 199, 97 S. Ct. 1021, 51 L. Ed. 2d 270, 1977 U.S. 53.

Brief Fact Summary
Under a federal program, widows automatically received benefits upon the death of their husbands. Widowers, however, had to prove they had been receiving support from their wives to receive benefits. A widower, upon being denied benefits, challenged the constitutionality of the distinction.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Gender-based differentiations that lay an unequal hand upon female workers are unconstitutional, unless they are substantially related to important governmental interests.

Facts
Under the Federal Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance Benefits (OASDI) program, widows automatically received benefits upon the death of their husbands. Widowers, however, had to prove they had been receiving support from their wives before they could receive benefits. The stated purpose of the statute was to save the expenses associated with determining, which spouses were really dependants. The Appellant, Califano the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare (Appellant), argued that the distinction was rational because of the differing welfare needs between widows and widowers. The Appellee, Goldfard (Appellee), a widower whose wife had paid taxes into the program for 25 years, was denied benefits and sued.

Issue
Did the gender-based distinction of OASDI violate the equal protection component of the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment of the United States Constitution (Constitution)?

Held
Yes. The judgment of the District Court is affirmed.

Dissent
Justice William Rehnquist (J. Rehnquist) stated that at most this case presents a gender-based classification that favors aged widows. This is scarcely an invidious discrimination. It in no way perpetuates the economic discrimination, which forms the basis for our heightened scrutiny review of gender-based classifications.

Discussion
This case presents an example of a gender-based classification that was arguably designed to advantage women, but that the Supreme Court of the United States (Supreme Court) found actually hurt women. Such a finding is common among cases involving gender-based distinctions.

