Citation
413 U.S. 634, 93 S. Ct. 2842, 37 L. Ed. 2d 853, 1973 U.S. 147.

Brief Fact Summary
A New York statute excluded aliens from all government civil service jobs filled by competitive examination. It did not apply to higher office positions, however. The Appellees, Dougall and others (Appellees), challenged the constitutionality of the statute.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Classifications made on the basis of alienage call for close judicial scrutiny.

Facts
A New York statute excluded aliens from all government civil service jobs filled by competitive examination. It did not apply to higher office positions, however, such as elected offices, offices filled by the governor or offices filled by legislative appointment. The purpose of the statute was to retain civil servants free of competing obligations to other powers. The underlying premise for the statute was that civil servants participate in the formation and execution of government policy and that divided loyalty might impair a civil servant’s judgment or the public’s confidence in her judgment. Appellees challenged the constitutionality of the statute.

Issue
Was New York’s flat statutory prohibition against the employment of aliens in its competitive civil servant jobs unconstitutional?

Held
Yes. The judgment of the District Court is affirmed.

Dissent
Justice William Rehnquist (J. Rehnquist) stated the principal purpose of those who drafted and adopted the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution (Constitution) was to prohibit the States from invidiously discriminating on the basis of race. There is no evidence to suggest that it was the intent of the Framers to render alienage a suspect classification.

Discussion
This case calls into question whether there was adequate justification for subjecting alienage classifications for close scrutiny. Can it be argued that alienage classifications are so eligible, because aliens, like blacks and women, have suffered a long history of discrimination in the United States of Ame

