Citation
22 Ill.429 U.S. 1124, 97 S. Ct. 1161, 51 L. Ed. 2d 574 (1977)

Brief Fact Summary
The Appellants, Craig, Whitener and others (Appellants), appeal the ruling of a federal district court upholding a statute’s gender-based classification for the sale of 3.2% beer.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
In order to withstand a constitutional challenge, gender-based classifications must serve important governmental objectives and must be substantially related to the achievement of those objectives.

Facts
An Oklahoma statute prohibited the sale of 3.2% “nonintoxicating” beer to males under the age of 21 and to females under the age of 18. The Appellants, a male between the age of 18 and 21 years, and the Appellant, Whitener, a licensed vendor of 3.2% beer sought injunctive and declaratory relief against the imposition of the Oklahoma statute’s gender differential between males and females and sought to have the statute declared unconstitutional because it “constituted invidious discrimination against males 18-20 years of age.” The statute’s constitutionality was sustained and the action was dismissed. The Supreme Court of the United States (Supreme Court) reversed this decision.

Issue
Whether the Oklahoma statute denies males between the ages of 18 and 21, the equal protection of the laws because it maintains a lower age restriction on the sale of 3.2% beer to females and a higher age restriction for males.

Held
Justice William Brennan (J. Brennan). Yes. Differentiating between males and females for purpose of setting age restrictions on the sale of 3.2% beer “constitutes a denial of the Equal Protections of the Laws to males aged 18-20.” The judgment of the District Court is reversed.

Dissent
The dissenting opinions are as follows:

Discussion
The Supreme Court now allows for three standards of review when equal protection challenges are presented to the Supreme Court. Included with the rational basis standard and the strict scrutiny standard, the Supreme Court now imposes a standard that falls in between the two historically recognized standards. The intermediate, middle tier standard that the court imposes in this case allows gender-based classifications, under judicial review, to be more efficiently analyzed for purposes of determining the constitutionality of the classifications.

