Citation
22 Ill.458 U.S. 718, 102 S. Ct. 3331, 73 L. Ed. 2d 1090 (1982)

Brief Fact Summary
The Respondent, Joe Hogan (Respondent), challenged the woman’s only admission policy after being denied admission into a nursing program solely on the basis of gender.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A women’s only admission’s policy is constitutional when it is supported by a significant government interests and is substantially related to the governmental objective.

Facts
From its inception, the Petitioner, the Mississippi University for Women (Petitioner), has limited its enrollment to only women. The Petitioner includes a School of Nursing, which maintains its own admission policy. The Respondent is a registered nurse who was denied admission to the Petitioner’s School of Nursing on the basis of gender. The Respondent sought to have the School of Nursing admission policy declared unconstitutional under the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution. However, the District Court denied preliminary injunctive relief for the Respondent. The Court of Appeals reversed the District Court ruling that “because the admissions policy discriminates on the basis of gender, the District Court improperly used a ‘rational relationship’ test to judge the constitutionality of the policy . . . . ” The judgment of the Court of Appeals was affirmed.

Issue
Whether a state statute that excludes males from enrolling in a state-supported professional nursing school violates the Equal Protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution (Constitution).

Held
Justice Sandra Day O’Connor (J. O’Connor) Yes. The State failed to show that the admission policy “serve[d] ‘important governmental objectives and that discriminatory means employed’ are ’substantially related to the achievement of those objectives’.”

Dissent
The dissenting opinions are as follows:

Discussion
If a state’s expressed governmental interest is inconsistent with the expressed governmental objective, the classified-gender discrimination cannot be upheld under constitutional standards.

