Citation
22 Ill.419 U.S. 393, 95 S. Ct. 553, 42 L. Ed. 2d 532 (1975)

Brief Fact Summary
The Appellant, Carol Sosna’s (Appellant) request for a divorce was denied because she had not met the one-year residency requirement.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A state has an interest in requiring those requesting a divorce be “genuinely attached” to the state by a showing that they have met the state’s durational residency requirements.

Facts
The Appellant married Michael Sosna on September 5, 1964, in Michigan. The couple lived in New York between October 1967 and August 1971 but separated. In August 1972, the Appellant moved to Iowa with her three children. In Iowa, the Appellant petitioned for a divorce in the District Court. The District Court dismissed the case for lack of jurisdiction because the Appellant had not met the one-year residency requirement. The Appellant argued in federal court that the Iowa residency requirement violated the United States Constitution (Constitution). A three-judge court ruled that the Iowa durational residency requirement was constitutional. The judgment is affirmed.

Issue
Whether Iowa’s divorce residency requirement is constitutional.

Held
Judge William Rehnquist (J. Rehnquist). Yes. Iowa’s state interest in requiring that those who seek a divorce from its courts be genuinely attached to the State, as well as a desire to insulate divorce decrees from the likelihood of collateral attack, requires a different resolution of the constitutional issue presented than [decided in previous cases]. The judgment is affirmed.

Dissent
The dissenting opinions are as follows:

Discussion
Although the Supreme Court may have struck down durational residency requirements as a qualification for welfare payments, [Shapiro v. Thompson, 394 U.S. 618 (1969)]; for voting, [Dunn v. Blumstein, 405 U.S. 330 (1972)]; and for medical care, [Memorial Hospital v. Maricopa County, 415 U.S. 250 (1974)], the Supreme Court has distinguished this case because the Appellant was not “irretrievably foreclosed from obtaining some part of what she sought.” Under the residency requirement, the Appellant would eventually gain “the same opportunity for adjudication.”

