Citation
972 F. Supp. 1008 (E.D. Va. 1997)

Brief Fact Summary
An all male military program in the state of Virginia created a parallel women’s program to remedy any unlawful treatment of women resulting from the all male military program’s admission policy.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The creation of a parallel program for women does not provide for an adequate solution for remedying the unequal treatment resulting from educational policies that exclude women in an effort to protect the essence or characteristics of an all male military program.

Facts
The Virginia Military Institute (VMI) is a military college that only allows admissions to men. VMI stands as the only all male public institution in the state of Virginia. The mission of VMI is to “produce ‘citizen-soldiers,’ men prepared for leadership in civilian life and in military service.” VMI education features “[p]hysical rigor, mental stress, absolute equality of treatment, absence of privacy, minute regulation of behavior, and indoctrination in desirable values.” The United States sued Virginia and VMI for the school’s admission policy. The District Court ruled in favor of VMI but, it was reversed and remanded by the Circuit Court suggesting that the state and VMI “[a]dmit women to VMI; establish parallel institutions or programs; or abandon state support, leaving VMI free to pursue its policies as a private institution . . . .” Therefore, according to the suggestions of the Court of Appeals, VMI proposed a “parallel program for women: Virginia Women’s Institute for

Issue
The issues presented to the Supreme Court of the United States (Supreme Court) are as follows:

Held
Justice Ruth Bader (J. Ginsburg). The Supreme Court’s ruling is as follows:

Dissent
Justice Antonin Scalia (J. Scalia). Government-funded military schools for men falls in line with the historical traditions of the United States. In this case, the Supreme Court fails to find that Virginia has a state interest to “provid[e] effective college education for its citizens” and “[t]hat single-sex instruction is an approach substantially related to that interest.” This country has a long-standing history and support for all male and all female institutions. The Court’s decision that the VMI’s unique characteristic of being an all male school violates constitutional principles makes a mockery of the “State’s important education interests” to maintain that unique characteristic. “VMI would be fundamentally altered if it admitted women . . .” into its military program.

Discussion
Educational institutions that are classified on the basis of gender do not allow for the elimination of unconstitutional gender discrimination.

