Citation
01-1863, 2001 BL 1782, 13 AD Cases 1043 (E.D. La. Oct. 23, 2001)

Brief Fact Summary
A competency examination issued to police officer candidates resulted in the denial of a disproportionately high number of black candidates.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Discriminatory impact cannot be the sole criterion for finding an equal protection violation.

Facts
The Petitioners, Washington and others (Petitioners), argued that a competency examination, issued to police officer candidates, was a tool used to exclude black applicants from the police force because the test resulted in the denial of a “disproportionately high number” of black police officer applicants. The Petitioners sought to invalidate the examination on the basis that it violated the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment and the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. Specifically, the Petitioners argued that (1) the number of black police officers was not in proportion to the city’s population mix, (2) more blacks failed the test than whites, and (3) that the test has not been validated as an adequate measure of job performance. The competency examination was sustained by the District Court, but invalidated by the Court of Appeals.

Issue
Whether a qualifying competency examination to applicants for police officer positions is valid under the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment and the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution (Constitution) when the passing examinees result in a “highly discriminatory impact in screening out black candidates” for the position.

Held
Justice Byron White (J. White) No. “Disproportionate impact is not irrelevant, but it is not the sole touchstone of an invidious racial discrimination forbidden by the Constitution.” Impact alone is not enough to invalidate the examination – there must be an intent or purpose to discriminate. The judgment of the Court of Appeals is reversed.

Discussion
A statute or a state action can not be held to be unconstitutional for the mere fact that the statute or the state action may result in an unfortunate impact on a particular race.

