Citation
548 U.S. 230 (2006)

Brief Fact Summary
Vermont passed a law on campaign finance which imposed restrictions on (1) the maximum expenditure allowable during the election campaign by a candidate for office (2) the maximum contribution allowable by an individual, political group or party towards the campaign expenses.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
(1) Limiting the expenditure allowable by a candidate for political office during a political election cycle  is against the First Amendment guarantee of free speech.

Facts
Vermont passed a campaign finance law providing for restrictions on (1) the maximum permissible expenditure by a candidate during the election process (2) the maximum contribution allowable by a single person, party or political group to a single candidate for campaign purposes, which was set at $200-$400 per candidate.

Issue
(1) Is it constitutional to set spending limits for an election campaign under the First Amendment?

Held
(Breyer, J.)

Dissent
(Stevens, J.) (1) deserves a negative verdict as it concerns limits on political expenditure. While precedent is important, Buckley  is a ruling which should be overturned since it reversed a practice of long standing on campaign expenditure. Another reason for demanding a negative ruling on (1) is that it would free candidates from the immobilizing burden of having to raise campaign funds.

Concurrence
(Alito,J.) The re-consideration of the ruling in Buckley was not demanded by the defendants here, and the issue is therefore not relevant.

Discussion
The plaintiff in the present case was Neil Randall, a Vermont legislator. The earlier case of Buckley did not say in so many words that the constitution categorically forbade the imposition of any spending limits whatsoever. This present ruling too does not alter the earlier possibility left open of mandatory restrictions being introduced which could stand up to constitutional guarantees. The most important aspect is that the decision does not   strike down as unconstitutional the existing regulations on voluntary expenditure written into public financing systems.

