Citation
208 F.3d 671,2000 U.S. App.140 Lab. Cas. (CCH) P34,035; 78 Empl. Prac. Dec. (CCH) P40,010

Brief Fact Summary
A single mother was fired from her employment after taking a day off of work to care for her sick child.  She brought suit claiming the employer violated the FMLA by terminating her.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A FMLA violation requires a two pronged inquiry to find a serious health condition: a period of incapacity for more than three days; and subsequent continued, supervised treatment relating to the same condition.

Facts
Juanita Caldwell was a single mother working for Holland, owner of several Kentucky Fried Chicken restaurants.  During her three year employment she developed an excellent work record.  In June of 1997 Caldwell was forced to take her son to the emergency clinic.  She notified her employer prior to her shift, and was given permission to miss the shift.  The doctor diagnosed her son as having an acute ear infection, prescribed a ten-day course of antibiotics and informed Caldwell that her son would probably require surgery to avoid permanent hearing loss.  Later that night, Caldwell worked an evening shift at another store at the request of her employer while Caldwell’s mother cared for her son.  Upon returning to her regular schedule she was abruptly fired.  Caldwell averred that her son suffered incapacity for more than three consecutive days and did not participate in normal activities.  During a follow up visit, a second ten-day course of antibiotics was prescribed.  Ten day

Issue
Did the district court err in granting summary judgment for Holland based on its finding that Caldwell’s termination did not violate the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA)?

Held
There was at least a question of fact as to whether Caldwell’s son’s illness constituted a serious condition causing incapacity for more than three days and required subsequent treatment as required under FMLA regulations.

Discussion
The Court did not find that Caldwell fell under the protection of the FMLA based on her son’s illness, but rather that summary judgment against Caldwell was inappropriate.  The case presents a description of how to determine when the serious health condition requirement of the FMLA is satisfied.

