Citation
179 F.3d 698,1999 U.S. App.99 Cal. Daily Op. Service 4229; 99 Daily Journal DAR 5371

Brief Fact Summary
Maria Navarro called 911 to report a warning that she received regarding her estranged husband coming to kill her and other house guests.  The dispatcher failed to send police because the husband had not yet arrived, and the husband killed four people on arrival.  The Navarros brought suit claiming that it was the Sheriff Department’s practice to give lower priority to domestic-violence 911 calls.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The district court erred when it concluded as a matter of law that the Defendants’ domestic violence/non-domestic violence classification was rational and reasonable under equal-protection analysis because the court based this holding on the assumption that domestic-violence crimes are less injurious and because it equated domestic violence calls with not-in-progress calls.

Facts
Maria Navarro received a telephone call from the brother of her estranged husband, Raymond Navarro, warning her that he was on his way to her house to kill her and anyone else present.  She called 911 and requested emergency assistance, informing the dispatcher about the warning, that she believed the warning, and that Raymond was under a restraining order.  Upon learning that he had not yet arrived, the dispatcher informed her that she would have to call back if he arrived.  Fifteen minutes later Raymond entered through the rear of the house and killed Maria and four other people, injuring two others.  The Navarros claim that the County carried out a policy and practice of not treating 911 requests for assistance relating to domestic violence as emergency calls.  The dispatcher testified that it was the practice of the Sheriff’s Department not to classify domestic violence 911 calls as Code 2 or emergency procedure calls.  The Navarros sued Defendants under 42 U.S.C Section: 1983 fo

Issue
Did the district court err in its holding that Defendants’ practice of treating domestic-violence calls differently from non-domestic calls passed the rational basis test as a matter of law?

Held
The district court erred when it concluded as a matter of law that the Defendants’ domestic violence/non-domestic violence classification was rational and reasonable under equal-protection analysis.

Discussion
The Court found that the district court’s finding that the Defendants’ classification was rational as a matter of law was in error because the court equated domestic violence calls with not-in-progress calls and assumed that they are less injurious than non-domestic-violence crimes.

