Citation
62 N.Y.2d 651; 1984 N.Y.

Brief Fact Summary
Defendant was indicted for the rape and sodomy of his wife, with whom he was separated.  The defendant was convicted and appealed, asserting that both statutes are unconstitutional.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The marital exemption and the female exemption to the rape and sodomy statutes are unconstitutional based upon equal protection analysis.

Facts
Defendant Mario Liberta and Denise Liberta married in 1978.  Defendant began to beat Denise shortly after the birth of their son in October of that year.  In 1980 Denise received a temporary order of protection from Family Court.  The order required defendant to move out and remain away from the family home and Denise.  It allowed defendant to visit his son once each weekend.  On the weekend of March 21, 1981 defendant did not visit his son.  On Tuesday of the following week he called to request visitation.  Denise agreed so long as he picked up the son and her and took them to the motel he was staying at under the understanding that a friend of his would be with them at all times.  The defendant and his friend picked the two up and drove to the hotel.  Upon arrival the friend left.  Shortly thereafter defendant attacked Denise, threatened to kill her, and forced her to perform fellatio and engage in sexual intercourse with him.  He also forced Denise to tell their son to watc

Issue
Is defendant correct in his assertion that the marital rape exemption in New York’s rape and sodomy statutes renders those statutes violative of the Equal Protection Clause?

Held
Based on Equal Protection analysis, the law must be that any person who engages in sexual intercourse or deviate sexual intercourse with any other person by forcible compulsion is guilty of either rape or sodomy.  The defendant’s conviction is affirmed.

Discussion
The Court finds both the marital exemption and the female exemption to be unconstitutional under equal protection analysis, but the defendant’s conviction is upheld.

