Citation
12 Cal. 3d 382,525 P.2d 669,115 Cal. Rptr. 765,1974 Cal.

Brief Fact Summary
Mary Anne Rodriguez brought suit for loss of consortium after her husband was severely injured at work.  The trial and appellate court found that the claim was not cognizable due to previous precedent.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
When a defendant negligent causes injury to a married party and it is foreseeable that such injury would negatively affect the spouse of the injured party, a duty of care arises and the spouse may bring suit for loss of consortium.

Facts
Richard and Mary Anne Rodriguez were married and gainfully employed.  They were saving to buy their own home and raise a large family.  Richard was severely injured at work leaving him paralyzed and a lifelong invalid.  Mary was forced to quit her job to physically care for Richard in all manners.  The psychological strain on Mary was extreme, in that her life was severely restricted, she had to witness her husband’s anguish, and all capacity for sexual intercourse was lost.  Richard brought suit against his employers and various subcontractors, and Mary also brought suit praying for general damages in her own right, the reasonable value of the nursing care she provides her husband, and compensation for loss of earnings and earning capacity.  The trial court disallowed Mary’s claims based on previous precedent preventing a wife from recovery when her husband is severely injured.  The appellate court affirmed.

Issue
Should California continue to adhere to the rule that a married person whose spouse has been injured by the negligence of a third party has no cause of action for loss of consortium?

Held
Previous precedent is overruled and each spouse has a cause of action for loss of consortium caused b a negligent or intentional injury to the other spouse by a third party.

Discussion
The Court found that policy concerns required the tort of loss of consortium to be recoverable.  Its reasoning included the disproportionate treatment of widows, who were permitted to recover for the wrongful death of their spouses.

