Citation
445 U.S. 40,100 S. Ct. 906,63 L. Ed. 2d 186,1980 U.S.

Brief Fact Summary
Petitioner was convicted of importing heroin into the United States and conspiracy to import, based upon the testimony of his wife.  Petitioner appealed, claiming that the admission of the adverse testimony of his wife, over his objection, contravened prior precedent and therefore constituted reversible error.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The witness-spouse alone has a privilege to refuse to testify adversely; the witness may be neither compelled to testify nor foreclosed from testifying to evidence that does not consist of confidential marital communications.

Facts
Petitioner Otis Trammel was indicted for importing heroin into the United States from Thailand and the Philippine Islands and for conspiracy to import heroin.  The indictment also named six unindicted co-conspirators, including petitioner’s wife.  Petitioner’s wife agreed to cooperate with the Government, and prior to trial the petitioner advised the court that the Government intended to call his wife as an adverse witness and he asserted his claim to privilege to prevent her from testifying against him.  At hearing on this motion, the Government called Mrs. Trammel and granted her use immunity.  She testified that she was married to Trammel and that her cooperation was based on assurances that she would be given lenient treatment.  The District Court ruled that Mrs. Trammel could testify to any act she observed during the marriage and to any communication made in the presence of a third person.  Confidential communications between petitioner and his wife were held privileged

Issue
May an accused invoke the privilege against adverse spousal testimony so as to exclude the voluntary testimony of his wife?

Held
The existing rule should be modified so that the witness-spouse alone has a privilege to refuse to testify adversely; the witness may be neither compelled to testify nor foreclosed from testifying.

Discussion
This case presents an overview of the historical privilege against spousal immunity, with the Court altering the rule to permit non-confidential marital communications to be testified to when the witness chooses to testify.

