Brief Fact Summary
Rwanda (D) challenged the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice when a suit was filed against her by the Democratic Republic of the Congo (P).

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The International Court of Justice lacks jurisdiction based on a treaty in which one party to such a treaty excludes dispute settlement obligations under the treaty before becoming a party, and fails to take formal acts to bring about withdrawal of the reservation.

Facts
In the suit filed by the Republic of the Congo (DRC) (P) against Rwanda (D), the DRC (P) tried to base the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice on nine treaties with dispute settlement clauses that provided for such jurisdiction. Of the nine treaties, Rwanda (D) excluded dispute settlement obligations in seven of the treaties while it was not party to the remaining two. Based on the nature of its obligations, Rwanda (D) challenged the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice.

Issue
Does the International Court of Justice lacks jurisdiction based on a treaty in which one party to such a treaty excludes disputes settlement obligations under the treaty before becoming a party and fails to make formal acts to bring about withdrawal of the reservation?

Held
<p>(Judge not stated in casebook excerpt) Yes. The International Court of Justice lacks jurisdiction based on a treaty in which one party to such a treaty excludes dispute settlement obligations under the treaty before becoming a party and fails to take formal acts to bring about withdrawal of the reservation.

Discussion
The analysis of the treaties in the casebook excerpt is similar to the Court’s analysis of treaties. The main principle here is that the I.C.J will not advance the case past the preliminary matter of jurisdiction where a state has not granted consent to the I.C.J’s jurisdiction, whatever atrocities have in fact been committed by the non-consenting state. Also, reversal of the position requires an overt act by the state in a situation like this, where there is evidence of non-consent, in order to convince the Court that after all, consent to the I.C.J’s jurisdiction was granted

