Brief Fact Summary
The United Nations (P) objected to the wall Israel (D) put up on the Palestinian territory.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
International Law, the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, The Hague Convention, relevant Security Council and General Assembly resolutions were all contravened by Israel (D), the occupying power, for constructing a wall on the Palestinian occupied territory.

Facts
The wall which Israel (D) constructed on the Palestinian territory and its route impaired the freedom of the Palestinians. The I.C.J. was however asked to provide an advisory opinion on the matter when the U.N. General Assembly (P) requested Israel (D) to halt and reverse the construction of the wall.

Issue
Were International Law, the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, The Hague Convention, relevant Security Council and General Assembly resolutions contravened by Israel (D), the occupying power, when it constructed a wall on the Palestinian occupied territory?

Held
Yes. International law, the Fourth Geneva Convention, The Hague Convention, relevant Security Council and General Assembly resolutions were all contravened by Israel (D), the occupying power, for constructing a wall on the Palestinian occupied territory.

Dissent
(Buergenthal, J.) Important issues of humanitarian law was raised by the construction of the wall, of which the Court ought to have declined to issue an advisory opinion because it failed to address Israel’s (D) arguments that it was willing to provide compensation and services for Palestinians residents, and that the wall was intended to be a temporary structure. Because the Court was not successful in justifying why it was not convinced that military exigencies and concern for security required Israel (D) to erect the wall along the chosen route, the Court’s conclusions are not convincing.

Discussion
The only dissenter in this case is Judge Buergenthal, who is a U.S. citizen. The U.S. was one of the eight votes against asking the I.C.J. for an advisory opinion. 74 members abstained but 90 members voted in favor.

