Brief Fact Summary
Nicaragua (P) brought a suit against the United States (D) on the ground that the United States (D) was responsible for illegal military and paramilitary activities in and against Nicaragua. The jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice to entertain the case as well as the admissibility of Nicaragua’s (P) application to the I.C.J. was challenged by the United States (D).

Synopsis of Rule of Law
(1) The jurisdiction to entertain a dispute between two states if each accepted the Court’s jurisdiction is within the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice.

Facts
The United States (D) challenged the jurisdiction of the I.C.J when it was held responsible for illegal military and paramilitary activities in and against Nicaragua (P) in the suit the plaintiff brought against the defendant in 1984. Though a declaration accepting the mandatory jurisdiction of the Court was deposited by the United States (D) in a 1946, it tried to justify the declaration in a 1984 notification by referring to the 1946 declaration and stating in part that the declaration “shall not apply to disputes with any Central American State….”

Issue
(1) Is the jurisdiction to entertain a dispute between two states, if they both accept the Court’s jurisdiction, within the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice?

Held
(1) Yes. The jurisdiction of the Court to entertain a dispute between two states if each of the States accepted the Court’s jurisdiction is within the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice. Even though Nicaragua (P) declaration of 1929 was not deposited with the Permanent Court, because of the potential effect it had that it would last for many years, it was valid.

Discussion
Although the questions of jurisdiction and admissibility are primarily based on the principle that the I.C.J. has only as much power as that agreed to by the parties, these can be quite complicated. The 1946 declaration of the United States and the 1929 declaration of Nicaragua was the main focus of the case on declaration and each of these declarations pointed out the respective parties’ intent as it related to the I.C.J’s jurisdiction.

