Citation
540 U.S. 1105

Brief Fact Summary
Steven Kinney (Defendant) was convicted, following a jury trial, of kidnapping, aggravated sexual assault, and lewd and lascivious behavior.  Defendant claims the sexual contact at issue and for which he was convicted was consensual, and appeals his conviction here.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Expert testimony concerning rape trauma syndrome is admissible, “to assist the jury in evaluating the evidence, and . . . to respond to defense claims that the victim’s behavior after the alleged rape was inconsistent with the claim that the rape occurred.”  Expert testimony concerning the rate of false rape reporting, however, when offered as an explanation of the typical behavior of rape victims and “tantamount to an expert opinion that the victim was telling the truth,” is inadmissible.

Facts
Defendant (who, by his own admission, was intoxicated the night of the crimes) and three of his friends drove to another man’s house one night, hoping to purchase cocaine.  Defendant entered the house and after a short time came out of the house carrying a young woman (Victim) over his shoulder.

Issues
Did the trial court error in admitting the expert testimony of Dr. Tyler concerning rape trauma syndrome at Defendant’s trial? Did the trial court error in admitting the expert testimony of Dr. Tyler concerning the incidence of false reporting by rape victims?

Held
Affirmed.

Discussion
As to the rape trauma syndrome evidence, the court pointed to past decisions, in which evidence of the same type was held admissible.  The court acknowledged that it had, “never explicitly ruled upon the admissibility of evidence of rape trauma syndrome,” but further stated that the trial court is the proper court to determine whether the evidence is admissible.  Pointing out that, “the jury may be at a loss to understand the behavior of the rape victim,” the court concluded that, “[f]or the purpose the evidence was used here, it is sufficiently reliable to be admitted.” As to the evidence related to the incidence of false rape reporting, the court followed past decisions that held similar testimony to be, “tantamount to an expert opinion that the victim was telling the truth . . . [which therefore] invaded the proper role of the jury.”  The court concluded that here, “Dr. Tyler’s testimony on the rate of false reporting clearly went over the line as explained [in past decisions].”  Reasoning that “the jury could infer from her testimony that scientific studies have shown that almost no woman falsely claims to have been raped and convict Defendant on that basis,” the court concluded that the evidence was, “inadmissible and prejudicial.”  However, the court affirms the trial court’s decision because the, “failure to exclude the inadmissible expert testimony [did not cause] a miscarriage of justice,” so no plain error was present.  Notably, the issue was not preserved for appeal, so the court’s review is only for plain error, which the court did not f<br />ind

