Citation
899 P.2d 1337 (Wyo. 1995)

Brief Fact Summary
The Appellant trustee argues that the district court erred in ordering the early termination of a trust after all beneficiaries consented and sought its termination.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
When all beneficiaries of a trust consent they can compel its early termination on the grounds that it lacks any remaining material purpose.

Facts
Mrs. Plummer established a trust in 1967.  The trust instructed that it be used to support Mrs. Plummer during her lifetime and after her death to pay $200 monthly payments to her only child Vivian and her husband Grant E. Miller, as well as to assist with educational expenses of their children- Davin, Hickey, and Miller, Jr. After the death of  Vivian and Grant E. Miller the trust was to be divided into “as many equal shares as there are then living children” of Vivian and Grant E. Miller.  And when all payments to the grandchildren had been made the balance of the trust was to be distributed to fund a scholarship at the University of Wyoming.  Mrs. Plummer died in 1976 and Vivian Miller died in 1992.  Grant E. Miller relinquished and assigned his interest in the monthly payments to his three children. Appellees, Grant E. Miller, Davin, Hickey, Miller Jr., and the University of Wyoming all consented to the termination and distribution of the trust even though Grant E. Miller w

Issue
Is a trustee an “aggrieved party” that has standing to appeal an order terminating a trust? Can the beneficiaries of a trust compel its termination when there is no material purpose in continuing the trust and all beneficiaries consent? Can a trustee be required to personally bear the expense of defending a trust?

Held
Judgment affirmed in part and reversed in part.

Discussion
The majority concludes that there is no material purpose for the continuation of the trust. Grant E. Miller renounced and assigned his monthly interest support to his children therefore it is no longer a material purpose of the trust.  In addition educational support was only a material purpose until the children reached age 35.  At time of the suit all beneficiaries had reached age 35. The appellant trustee argued that there were unborn contingent beneficiaries who did not consent to the termination.  However the court finds that the terms of the trust make clear that there are no unborn, contingent beneficiaries.  In directing that the trust be divided in “. . . as many equal shares as there are then living children. . . ” it provides for per capita distribution and no heirs of Davin, Hickey, or Miller, Jr. could be involved.

