Citation
83 U.S. 36, 16 Wall. 36, 21 L. Ed. 394 (1873)<br />

Brief Fact Summary
A Louisiana statute granting a monopoly over the butchering trade in three areas of the state was unsuccessfully challenged by Plaintiffs, butchers not included in the monopoly, under the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Amendments.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The Thirteenth Amendment does not empower individuals when their rights are taken, but rather is limited only to slavery. The purpose of the Fifteenth Amendment is to enforce the Thirteenth Amendment. The Privileges and Immunities clause only protects United States citizens, not state citizens. Thus, only states can protect the rights of state citizens.

Facts
Louisiana passed a statute creating a monopoly over the butchering trade in three areas of the state in order to promote health and safety of the state citizens. The Plaintiffs, butchers who were excluded, sued claiming that the state law created an “involuntary servitude” in violation of the Thirteenth Amendment and that the law violated the Fourteenth Amendment by abridging the “privileges and immunities” of the citizens of the United States, thereby denying the Plaintiffs “the equal protection of the laws,” as well as “deprivation of their property without due process of law.” The highest state court sustained the law.

Issue
Whether state law created an “involuntary servitude” in violation of the Thirteenth Amendment.

Held
No. Judgment of the highest state court affirmed. The purpose of the Thirteenth Amendment was to abolish slavery and to guarantee freedom to the “slave race.” The word “servitude” is personal in nature and can only be applied to slavery.

Dissent
The privileges and immunities referred to in the Fourteenth Amendment include “the right to pursue lawful employment.” Since the Plaintiffs were denied such employment, the Clause should provide them with protection.

Discussion
By holding that the Fourteenth Amendment Privileges and Immunities Clause did not afford protection to state citizens, the majority substantially limited the application of that Amendment.

