Citation
12 Cal.App.4th 647, 16 Cal.Rptr.2d 16 (Ct. App. 1993)

Brief Fact Summary
Appellant Borelli, entered into a contract with her late husband to provide nursing care for him at home in exchange for property. Appellant’s husband did not leave her the promised property in his will. Appellant is bringing this claim against Appellee Brusseau, also the executor of her husband’s estate, to recover the promised property.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Contracts between spouses to provide care during illness in exchange for compensation violate public policy.

Facts
Appellant and her late husband entered into a prenuptial agreement. After being hospitalized with heart problems, Appellant’s husband became concerned about his health and told Appellant he intended to leave her an interest in a lot, a life estate in a condominium, a twenty-five percent interest in Borelli Meat Co., cash remaining in all of his bank accounts at his death, costs of educating Appellant’s daughter, all of his interest in a residence, all furniture in the residence, his interest in a partnership, and health insurance for Appellant and her daughter.

Issue
Does a contract for a spouse to provide care for an ill spouse in exchange for compensation violate public policy?

Held
Yes. A contract for a spouse to provide care for an ill spouse in exchange for compensation violates public policy.

Dissent
The dissenting opinion disagrees with the majority on several points. First, the dissent does not find a preexisting duty for spouses to provide the type of nursing care involved in the present case. Second, the dissent argues that the policy is inconsistent with modern attitudes and mores. Third, the dissenting opinion argues that spouses should be able to contract with each other in the same way as non-married persons. Fourth, the dissent makes a distinction between the duty to care for an ill spouse and the duty to personally care for an ill spouse

Discussion
In the present case, the Court holds that a contract between Appellant and her husband for Appellant to care for him in exchange for property violates public policy.

