Citation
Cal. Ct. App., 140 Cal. App. 4th 1238; 45 Cal. Rptr. 3d 293 (2006)

Brief Fact Summary
The arbitration provisions of a written agreement and the release which compelled arbitration of claims arising from the production and broadcast of a television program were contended by the Higginses (P) on the ground that these were unconscionable.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
When an arbitration clause in a written agreement is unconscionable and is being challenged, the clause and not the whole agreement may not be enforced.

Facts
Five orphaned siblings (the “Higginses (P)”) whose age ranges was between 14 to 21, and living with the Leomitis, were approached by the producers of the television program Extreme Makeover: Home Edition (Extreme Makeover) with a proposal to make a show based on the loss of their parents and their living with the Leomitis’. Fortunately, the Higginses (P) and the Leomitis were chosen to participate in the program and apart from this, the Leomitis home would also be renovated. A 24 single-spaced pages and 72 numbered paragraphs contract were sent to the Higginses (P) and Leomitis by the producers.

Issue
is it possible for an arbitration clause in a written agreement, which is unconscionable and is being challenged, the clause and not the whole agreement, to be enforced?

Held
(Rubin, J.) No. When an arbitration clause in a written agreement is unconscionable and is being challenged, the clause and not the whole agreement may not be enforced. Arbitration agreements are given the same treatment as any other contract by the state laws but the enforcement of arbitration clauses in contracts involving interstate commerce is governed by the Federal Arbitration Act (FAA). An arbitration agreement will not be enforced if it is unconscionable. The determination of whether a contract is a contract of adhesion is the first step towards analyzing whether an arbitration agreement is unconscionable. A contract of adhesion is a standardized contract drafted and imposed by the party having upper hand in terms of bargaining strength and relegates to the other party “only the opportunity to adhere to the contract or reject it.”

Discussion
quite a number of decisions have held the fact that a contract is adhesive; constitute enough ground to render a contract procedurally unconscionable. Other decisions have requested for more factors to be shown before an adhesion contract can be found to be procedurally unconscionable. This could be as a result of unavailable market altenatives

