Citation
694 F. Supp. 2d 1302 (S.D. Fla. 2010)

Brief Fact Summary
the overdraft fees charged by the federally chartered banks (Banks) (D) on the accounts on debit card transactions was contended by the checking account customers on the ground that the charges were exorbitant. This was done by charging the fee to the customers’ account on a “largest to smallest” basis and this move resulted in increased revenue for the Banks (D). Among the several ground in which the Bank (D) to dismiss the case was federal preemption; which stipulates that the customers’ (P) contracts with the Banks (D) allowed the Banks (D) conduct and that unconscionability cannot be asserted as an affirmative claim, but on the other hand, unconscionability may be asserted only as a defense.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
(1) the claims state laws have against federal chartered banks are not federally preempted where such claims are not regulatory in nature and only incidentally affect the exercise of the banks’ deposit taking powers.

Facts
A suit was brought against the federally chartered banks (Banks) (D) and individual Banks (D) by their checking account customers from different states, for the exorbitant overdraft charges levied against their accounts on debit card transactions. These amounts were deducted by debiting the accounts of the customers from the “largest to the smallest”, resulting in the maximization of the overdraft revenue fees of the banks. Because of the spread of the litigations, it was consolidated in the federal district court as multi-district litigation.

Issue
(1) are the claims which state laws have against federal chartered banks, not federally preempted where such claims are not regulatory in nature and only incidentally affect the exercise of the banks’ deposit taking powers?

Held
(King, J) (1) No. The claims state laws have against federal chartered banks are not federally preempted where such claims are not regulatory in nature and only accidentally affect the exercise of the banks’ deposit taking powers. The Banks asserted that their business activities is subjected exclusively to federal regulation and that any attempt by the state law to regulate, limit or condemn their activities is preempted. The plaintiffs however clarified that they were not challenging the rights of the Banks (D) to charge on overdrafts but they were challenging the manipulation of the overdraft fees to the benefits of the banks (D). It can therefore be deduced that the claims are not preempted and so, the motion to dismiss on this ground is dismissed.

Discussion
this case showed that the customers (P) had alleged sufficient facts to proceed with their claim and it was because of this reason that judgment was given in their favor. Ordinarily, the court did not conclude that the challenged terms and practices were unconscionable. The doctrine of “unconscionability” is stipulated in U.C.C. S 2-302.  The formulation of this standard has been incorporated into the Restatement (Second) S 208 although it primarily applies to contracts for the sale of goods but this has now being applied to all types of contracts. The doctrine as being used affirmatively and defensively as shown in this case to avoid contract terms or contracts that represents grossly unfair bargains.

