Citation
22 Ill.246 Cal.App.2d 123, 54 Cal.Rptr. 533 (Ct. App. 1966)

Brief Fact Summary
Plaintiff Donald Odorizzi sought to rescind his written resignation as a school teacher on the grounds that it was made under duress, menace, fraud, mistake, and undue influence. Plaintiff, after being arrested on criminal charges of homosexuality, alleges that we was coerced into resigning by his school principle and district superintendent.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A party may rescind an agreement by showing such agreement was the result of undue influence.

Facts
On June 11, 1964, Plaintiff was arrested and charged on the basis criminal homosexual activity. On June 13, Plaintiff submitted his resignation as a school teacher. Plaintiff alleged that he was coerced to submit a resignation by the principal of his school and the district superintendent after both individuals visited Plaintiff at his home following Plaintiff’s arrest. Plaintiff alleged that while visiting his home, the principal and district superintendent threatened to suspend, publicly humiliate, and embarrass Plaintiff unless Plaintiff resigned, and that they told Plaintiff he had no time to speak with an attorney and that his chances of ever teaching again would be ruined if he did not resign. Plaintiff alleged that he was under severe mental and emotional pain, and that at the time he submitted his resignation he had been awake for over forty hours as a result of being arrested, questioned and detained by state police. Plaintiff’s charges were subsequently dropped and h

Issue
Whether Plaintiff had a cause of action to rescind the agreement based on duress, fraud (actual and constructive), mistake, or undue influence.

Held
The Court upheld the Trial Court’s dismissal of Plaintiff’s complain on all grounds except for undue influence.

Discussion
A party may rescind an agreement if it can be shown that such agreement was not entered into under free will, but was a the product of excessive pressure being put on one who was at the time to be vulnerable and physically and/or emotionally weak.

