Citation
N.J. Super. Ct., App. Div., 348 N.J. Super 243. 791 A2d 1068 (2002)

Brief Fact Summary
the bad-faith course of conduct that thwarted Seidenberg (P) reasonable expectations which related to compensation under the contract, was the basis of Seidenberg’s (P) claim that Summit (D) breached the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing that arose from the contract they had between each other.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
(1) that the plaintiff was not financially vulnerable when the contract was been formed and because the plaintiff bargained the contract with the assistance of highly competent counsel, does not mean that a claim of breach of the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing is precluded due to the fact that the parties possessed equal bargaining power.

Facts
Summit (D) purchased brokerage firms from Seidenberg (P) and Raymond (collectively, “Seidenberg (P)”). As part of this transaction between these two parties, Seidenberg (P) maintained his position as an executive of the brokerage firms and was also to be in charge of the daily operations of any other employee benefits insurance business that might be part of Summit (D) in the future. The employment agreement which Summit (D) had with Seidenberg (P), acknowledged the parties’ joint obligation to work together, keeping in mind that the future performance of the brokerage firms and Seidenberg (P) compensation were tied to the firms growth and success and the line of business at Summit (D).

Issue
(1) can it be said that because the parties possessed equal bargaining power, financial vulnerability of the plaintiff during the contract’s formation and plaintiff negotiation of the contract with the assistance of highly competent counsel, are reasons why a claim of breach of the implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing are precluded?

Held
(Fisher, J.)

Discussion
Implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing is never used to override or change an express contract term and it is very important to keep this in mind. On the other hand, implied obligation can be seen as a tool for safeguarding the negotiations which the parties themselves have made against subsequent attempts of sabotage by either of the parties.

