Citation
22 Ill.157 Or. App. 176, 968 P.2d 396 (Ct. App. 1999)

Brief Fact Summary
Plaintiff claims a prescriptive easement across Defendants’ property due to the open and notorious use of Defendants’ property as a roadway for more than ten years.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
In order to establish a prescriptive easement a claimant must show, by clear and convincing evidence, an open and notorious use of Defendants’ land adverse to the rights of Defendants for a continuous and uninterrupted period of ten years.

Facts
In 1957, Plaintiff and her deceased husband purchased lot 11 in the River Crest Acres Subdivision. Defendants’ parents owned lot 14 in the subdivision, which was three lots west of Plaintiff’s and bordered Fifth Avenue. Both lots face Sunset Avenue. In 1958, the owners of the subdivision built a new subdivision called Hidden Acres. That development created a six-foot wide alley running to Fifth Avenue along the rear of lots on Plaintiff and Defendants’ block. As a result of the alley, Plaintiff and her husband gained access to Fifth Avenue from the rear of their property. The alley was not wide enough to accommodate the Plaintiff’s boat so they traveled over a portion of lots 12, 13 and 14 (Defendants’ lot) to get from their house to Fifth Avenue. The Plaintiff testified that she and her husband used the path every weekend from 1959 to 1969 and that from 1970 until 1993, when her husband died, he took the boat out using the alley. In 1979, Plaintiff’s husband built a large sho

Issue
Did the Plaintiff establish a prescriptive easement?

Held
Yes. Judgment affirmed.

Discussion
The doctrine of prescriptive easement is similar in character to that of adverse possession, which will be covered in another section of the text. The chief difference is that a prescriptive easement is adverse use by one of the lands of another, which does not result in a change in ownership of the land itself, whereas adverse possession does cause such a shift in ownership.

