Citation
22 Ill.26 N.Y.2d 219, 309 N.Y.S.2d 312, 257 N.E.2d 870, 1 ERC 1175 (1970)

Brief Fact Summary
Plaintiffs are neighboring landowners of Atlantic Cement Company (Defendant) and have sought an injunction and damages in this suit arising from injuries suffered to their properties from dirt, smoke and vibration. The trial court found a nuisance and awarded temporary damages, but declined to enjoin the Defendant.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Ordinarily, when a nuisance is found, an injunction will be ordered to abate the nuisance, but this court created an exception. The court ordered the injunction but it may be lifted if Defendant pays Plaintiffs permanent damages.

Facts
Plaintiffs are neighboring landowners of the Defendant and have sought an injunction and damages in this suit arising from injuries suffered to their properties from dirt, smoke and vibration. The trial court found a nuisance and awarded temporary damages, but declined to enjoin the Defendant. The plant, if ordered closed, would result in an investment loss by Defendant of $45,000,000.00 and the loss of 300 jobs. The total amount of damage to the Plaintiffs was found to be $185,000.00.

Issue
Should the court resolve the litigation between the parties as equitably as possible, or should the court seek the promotion of the public welfare and channel the litigation into broad public objectives?

Held
The court should resolve the litigation as equitably as possible.

Dissent
The dissent would not overrule the standard of granting an injunction when a nuisance is found. The dissent points out that the Defendant can simply pay a one-time fee to the community and continue polluting without regard for public safety.

Discussion
The court was obviously trying to find a way to avoid the total shut down of the cement plant. The opinion also discusses the idea of incentives to clean the plants operations. Did the court offer a disincentive, as the dissent argues, whereby the Defendant, upon payment of a mere $185,000.00, has a license to pollute?

