Citation
22 Ill.69 Md. App. 199, 516 A.2d 1028 (Ct. Spec. App. 1986)

Brief Fact Summary
A covenant was made between Gallagher (Defendant) and Bell (Plaintiff) with the intent to develop a subdivision. The covenant provided that, in exchange for a right of way, the Defendant agreed “for themselves, their heirs and assigns, that they will dedicate one-half of the streets bounding their property and shall share pro-rata the cost of installation of said streets and the utilities by the Plaintiffs.”

Synopsis of Rule of Law
In order for a covenant to run with the land four elements must be satisfied: 1) the covenant must ‘touch and concern’ the land; 2) the original covenanting parties must have intended for the covenant to run; 3) there must be some privity of estate; and 4) the covenant must be in writing.

Facts
A covenant was made between the Defendant, who purchased a tenant house on one half-acre from the Sisters of Mercy, and the Plaintiff, who bought the remainder of the tract (34 and one-half acres) and they intended to develop the tract with a subdivision. The covenant provided that, in exchange for a right of way, the Defendants agreed “for themselves, their heirs and assigns, that they will dedicate one-half of the streets bounding their property and shall share pro-rata the cost of installation of said streets and the utilities by the Plaintiffs.” This covenant was entered into by the parties on June 16, 1961. Then, in October of 1979, Defendant sold the half-acre property and tenant house to Deborah Camelier. Camelier became aware of the covenant between the Plaintiff and Defendant and insisted on an indemnity agreement from the Defendant. In July of 1983, Plaintiff initiated construction on the roads around the Camelier property and demanded $18,000 from Camelier based on

Issue
Did the covenant run with the land or was it personal as between Plaintiff and Defendant?

Held
The covenant ran with the land. Judgment reversed.

Discussion
As the court noted, agreements to pay money for improvements have been held to be covenants running with the land. The Defendant, it may be argued, should not have entered into a covenant, which was such a burden to the estate, but it would be equally true that Camelier should not have simply relied on an indemnity agreement to avoid liability under the covenant.

