Citation
22 Ill.193 Va. 522, 69 S.E.2d 342 (1952)

Brief Fact Summary
The Lindseys (Plaintiffs) sought an injunction to prevent Clark (Defendant) from using a ten feet wide right of way, which had been reserved by earlier deeds, but not particularly in the deed to Plaintiffs.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The lower court applied the rule that “[h]e who seeks equity must do equity.” The mere non-use of an easement created by deed, without more, is not sufficient to cause abandonment.

Facts
In 1937, the Clarks were the owners of four adjoining lots, nos. 31, 32, 33, and 34, each lot fronting Magnolia avenue and running back therefrom for 150 feet to a 20 feet alley. The Clark residence was on lots 31 and 32. Then, in 1937, the Clarks conveyed to Mr. and Mrs. Six (Mrs. Six being Clarks’ daughter) the front two-thirds of lots 33 and 34, which was a frontage of 50 feet and extending back 100 feet. On the rear one-third of these lots Clark built a house and garage for rental purposes. The Six’s built a house on their property (the front two-thirds of lots 33 and 34). The Clark deed to the Sixes contained the following reservation: “There is reserved, however, a right of way of ten (10) feet in width, along the South side of the two lots herein conveyed for the benefit of the property in the rear.” In 1939 the Sixes conveyed their property to the McGhees, with the reservation in the deed. Then, the McGhees conveyed the property to the Plaintiffs without the reservatio

Issue
Has the right of way along the South side of the Plaintiffs property been abandoned by the Defendant through non-use?

Held
No. The decision was affirmed.

Discussion
The court was obviously interested in a fair, or equitable, outcome in the case. It would be unfair to require the Plaintiffs, who sought to limit the Defendant to the deed easement on the South side, to tear out their shrubs (and two feet of their house) in order to let Defendant use the South side easement. The decision to allow the Defendant to continue to use the North side right of way was a fair outcome.

