Citation
22 Ill.260 Wis. 372, 50 N.W.2d 920 (1952)

Brief Fact Summary
This case arises from a dispute when an easement was established in Tisch’s favor for all purposes of ingress and egress to and from an alleyway against S.S. Kresge Co. (Plaintiff), in 1936. Thereafter, Winkelman Realty Co. (Defendant), purchased the Tisch property in 1943, and began using the easement previously used by Tisch in his barbershop and living quarters, for transportation and storage of goods, which were consigned to various stores of the Defendant.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A prescriptive right acquired by a particular use of the property cannot ordinarily justify an added use in connection with the dominant estate in a manner far different from that employed in the original use.

Facts
Winkelman Realty, Winkelman Department Stores and Winkelman Men’s Stores are all owned by the same group and are referred to collectively as Defendants. The Plaintiff in 1936, tried to close the alleyway. Tisch was allowed his easement for ingress and egress to and from the alleyway as against the Plaintiff’s property in 1936. Then, Defendants (who already owned adjacent properties) bought Tisch’s property, along with the easement in 1943. The Defendants began using the alleyway as a conduit for storage of goods and transport of goods to their various adjacent stores. The Plaintiff sued to establish a claim against any claim of the Defendant’s except for ingress and egress (use of easement as in prior owners), to enjoin Defendants from using any portion of Plaintiff’s property except for ingress and egress, and to enjoin Defendants from transporting merchandise to or from their Men’s Store or Department Store by way of Tisch’s former property. The trial court found that the ea

Issue
Can a prescriptive easement for one purpose be added to by a subsequent usage and still be upheld?

Held
No. Judgment affirmed. The requested modification of the Plaintiff is denied on the basis that the modification requests relief, which was in excess of the complaint’s prayer for relief.

Discussion
A prescriptive right acquired by a particular use of the property cannot ordinarily justify an added use in connection with the dominant estate in a manner far different from that employed in the original use.

