Citation
22 Ill.86 N.H. 337, 169 A. 1 (1933)

Brief Fact Summary
Sakansky (Plaintiff) took title in land, which included an eighteen feet wide right of way across the Defendants’ land. The Defendants wanted to build a building on their land over the right of way or, in the alternative, allow Plaintiff a new right of way around the building.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The rule of reasonableness dictates that there is, in the absence of a contract to the contrary, no way for the court to change the boundaries of a pre-existing right of way to limit the headroom of the right of way to eight feet.

Facts
Plaintiff took title in land, which included an eighteen feet wide right of way across the Defendants’ land. The right of way was particularly described as to its position on the ground. There were no limits on Plaintiff’s use of the right of way. The Defendants wanted to build a building on their land over the right of way. They proposed building over the right of way and leaving an eight foot high gap above it, or, in the alternative, allowing Plaintiff a new right of way around the building, but such that the Plaintiff would intersect his lands in the same place as under the old way. The case was heard before a master in the lower court where the facts presented were such that the Plaintiff could not use the old right of way if he wished to use vehicles over eight feet high. Plaintiff objected to the master considering any evidence regarding the proposed new right of way. The master found that the case was to be governed by a rule of reasonableness, and found that in light

Issue
May the Defendants build over the right of way by limiting the height of the right of way to eight feet?

Held
No. The Plaintiff has a right to the old right of way and more headroom than eight feet, thus, the Defendants may not build thereon.

Discussion
Plaintiff attempted to prevent the Defendants from building over the right of way, even when the Defendants had offered a new right of way. In a case, when the Plaintiff is an easement holder, the result of the case is likely to be that the easement will remain unchanged. Otherwise, the property of the servient estate would be subject to variable easements.

