Citation
22 Ill.68 N.M. 283, 361 P.2d 325 (1961)

Brief Fact Summary
Defendant breached a purported real covenant containing restrictions in deed, but which are freely waived or subject to alteration by the grantor, his heirs or assigns.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
When the grantor reserves the power to alter the restrictions as to one lot owner without the consent of any other lot owner, the requirement for mutuality or reciprocity is not met and the covenant created is personal and does not run with the land.

Facts
In 1937 Dickason and wife owned a tract of land which was then added to Albuquerque and subdivided with restrictive covenants placed thereon. The restrictions were intended to restrict the use of land to residential housing only. The last sentence of the restriction stated that the covenants were to end in January 1970, except that it was mutually understood that the restrictions could be altered or amended at any time prior to January 1970 by the grantor, his successors and assigns, and any owner of any lot at the time of the proposed amendment to the restrictions. The amendment or alteration with one owner of one lot by the grantor would be permitted to occur without requiring the consent of the adjacent property owners. The Plaintiffs are two owners of lots in the addition and the Defendants are purchasing two of the adjoining lots from Mr. and Mrs. Thomas, who now own the lots to be purchased. The contract for purchase provides that the property is being sold subject to th

Issue
Is a reservation by the grantor of a general power to dispense with restrictions a personal covenant, or one which runs with the land?

Held
Personal covenant. Reversed and remanded with instructions to dismiss complaint.

Discussion
What possible motive could the original grantor had in reserving the right to change the restrictions as to one lot while not affecting the rights of the other lots? One motivation could be that the grantor reserved a valuable right under which the grantor could sell amendments to the lot restrictions one at a time. There was no evidence of a scheme of enforceable restrictions on this case.

