Citation
22 Ill.89 Mich. App. 11, 279 N.W.2d 564 (Ct. App. 1979)

Brief Fact Summary
In this case, Sun Oil Company (Defendant) leased property, which had oil wells on it. The property was subject to an order by the Michigan Department of Natural Resources, which limited production to seventy-five barrels of oil per well per day. The Defendant is accused of overproducing 180,000 barrels of oil and draining oil from beneath Plaintiffs’ land.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
If it can be said that Defendant’s overproduction deprived Plaintiffs of the opportunity to claim and take the oil under their respective properties, then Defendant will be liable for conversion.

Facts
In this case Defendant leased property, which had oil wells on it. The property was subject to an order by the Michigan Department of Natural Resources, which limited production to seventy-five barrels of oil per well per day. The Defendant is accused of overproducing 180,000 barrels of oil and draining oil from beneath Plaintiffs’ land. The Plaintiffs sued for an accounting, or in the alternative, for compensatory and exemplary damages. The trial court found that Defendant had intentionally and illegally overproduced 150,000 barrels of oil and that 50,000 barrels of this oil had been drained from Plaintiffs’ lands. The nature of the violation of Defendant was stated in the appellate court as being a tort of conversion of the Plaintiffs’ oil. Conversion is defined as any distinct act of dominion wrongfully exerted over another’s personal property in denial of or inconsistent with his rights therein. The Defendant appealed from the trial court.

Issue
Is the Defendant liable in conversion for the overproduction of oil, some of which was found to have been removed from underneath Plaintiffs’ land?

Held
Yes. The decision was affirmed.

Discussion
Take note of the difference between the capture rule, with modifications, as it applies here to oil and gas, and the harsh capture rule with no modification as it applies to water in the Texas case of Sipriano v. Great Spring Waters of America, Inc.

