Citation
74 N.Y.2d 201,543 N.E.2d 49, 544 N.Y.S.2d 784,1989 N.Y.

Brief Fact Summary
A same-sex couple lived in a rent-controlled apartment, however, only one tenant was the tenant of record. After one tenant died, the apartment owner ordered the remaining tenant to vacate the unit.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A family in a rent-controlled apartment, are those people who reside in a household with all of the normal familial characteristics, even if those people are not related by marriage, adoption or blood.

Facts
Miguel Braschi (Plaintiff) and Leslie Blanchard lived together in a rent-controlled apartment until Blanchard passed away. The two men had been life partners for ten years. Blanchard was the only tenant of record. Stahl Associates Company (Defendant) informed Plaintiff that he had no right to occupy the unit and ordered him to vacate the premises. A New York statute on rent control stated that only family members of the tenant of record could continue to live in apartment units after the death of the tenant of record, but it did not define what constituted a family.

Issue
When determining if a person should be allowed to remain in a rent-controlled apartment after the death of the tenant of record, should the term ‘family’ include only those related by blood, consanguinity or adoption?

Held
No.

Dissent
The purpose of the provision is to create succession rights to the real property when the tenant of record dies. Under estate succession laws, family relationships are determined by blood, marriage, and adoption. These relationships have certain legal obligations that are not imposed on unrelated individuals. Such an interpretation promotes certainty and consistency in the law.

Discussion
The court decided to define what constitutes a family in broad terms in order to protect a larger class of people, including unmarried couples. After the tenant of record dies, the court decided that the others living in the household should not have to worry about being evicted from their home.

