Citation
494 U.S. 872, 110 S. Ct. 1595, 108 L. Ed. 2d 876, 52 FEP Cases 855 (1990)<br />

Brief Fact Summary
The Respondents, Yoder and other members of a Wisconsin Amish community (Respondents) took issue with the State’s compulsory education law, maintaining that keeping children in school until the age of sixteen was against their religious principals, in violation of the Free Exercise Clause.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
When a true religious interest exists, a state cannot enforce a law, which abrogates that interest, provided the public interest in enforcing the law is not otherwise burdened.

Facts
The Respondents refused to send their children to school after they completed the eighth grade, in conformance with their religious practices. The Petitioner, the State of Wisconsin (Petitioner), brought an action seeking to enforce its compulsory education law. The Respondents were convicted in violation of the law. The Supreme Court of Wisconsin reversed, sustaining the Respondents’ argument that their actions fell under the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment of the United States Constitution (Constitution). Wisconsin appealed, and the Supreme Court of the United States (Supreme Court) granted certiorari.

Issue
This case considers whether members of a religious community can be compelled to follow a compulsory education scheme, which could be detrimental to their own religious teachings.

Held
Affirmed.

Dissent
Justice William Douglas (J. Douglas) dissented, noting that the claims brought herein were by parents and may not have necessarily been the viewpoints of their high-school-age children.

Discussion
While there are valid governmental interests to be upheld by compulsory education schemes, these interests do not necessarily outweigh the Free Exercise of religion as mandated by the First Amendment of the Constitution.Employment Division,

Brief Fact Summary
The Respondents, Smith and others (Respondents), were discharged from their employment for ingesting peyote in furtherance of their Native American religious beliefs.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
While the Free Exercise Clause holds great weight when considering State laws, it does not mandate the allowance and acceptance of activities that would otherwise be seen as criminal.

Facts
The Respondents, both members of the Native American Church, ingested peyote for sacramental purposes at a ceremony. Because their action was directly related to their employment at a drug rehabilitation facility, they were both terminated. Upon applying for unemployment benefits, the Respondents were summarily turned down, based on misconduct associated with the use of drugs. Respondents appealed, relying on Sherbert, based on the fact that their conduct was in furtherance of their Free Exercise rights as outlined by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution (Constitution). The Oregon Supreme Court held that Respondents religious use of peyote served to invalidate the unemployment scheme. The Supreme Court of the United States (Supreme Court) granted certiorari to consider this decision.

Issue
This case considers whether the Free Exercise Clause may be used to allow an activity that is otherwise illegal and in derogation of the public interest.

