Citation
436 B.R. 125 (Bankr. E.D. Cal. 2010)

Brief Fact Summary
A prominent Illinois white supremacist was denied a law license by the state board of bar examiners on the grounds that his “moral character and fitness” were not to the proper standard.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
An applicant for a state law license may be determined to be deficient in “moral character and fitness” on the basis of hateful, extremist beliefs.

Facts
Respondent, Matthew Hale, was a well-known white supremacist in Illinois who headed the “World Church of the Creator.” This “church” was solely dedicated to the “survival, expansion, and advancement of the White Race [sic] exclusively” and actively preached hatred against Jews, Muslims, and nearly every other racial, religious, and ethnic group. Although it claimed to advocate non-violence, several of its members were involved in notorious hate crimes throughout its existence. Respondent attended the University of Illinois Law School and passed the Illinois bar exam in 1998. His character and fitness to serve as an attorney in Illinois was called into question by his beliefs, however, and they are examined here.

Issue
Does Respondent have the “moral character and fitness” to practice law in Illinois?

Held
No. The board found that Hale’s extremist beliefs represented a “gross deficiency in moral character” that left him unsuitable to practice law in Illinois. His commitment to extreme racial hatred and discrimination would put him on a “collision course” with the state’s Rules of Professional Conduct.

Discussion
In his challenge to this decision, Hale argued that the state’s “discrimination” against his private beliefs should not have prevented him from obtaining his law license. The wisdom of the board’s decision appears to have been confirmed, however, when one of Hale’s followers immediately engaged in a three-day shooting spree apparently motivated by the board’s decision in this case. Hale is currently serving a 40-year prison sentence for soliciting an undercover FBI agent to kill an Illinois judge who ruled against him in an unrelated case.

