Citation
437 U.S. 365, 98 S. Ct. 2396, 57 L. Ed. 2d 274, 1978 U.S. 114

Brief Fact Summary
The Respondent-Plaintiff, Kroger (Plaintiff), a citizen of Iowa, filed suit against Omaha Public Power district, a Nebraska citizen, in federal district court.  The basis of federal court jurisdiction was diversity.  Respondent amended the complaint naming the Petitioner-Defendant, Owen Equipment & Erection Co. (Defendant), an Iowa corporation, as an additional defendant.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Diversity jurisdiction does not exist unless each defendant is a citizen of a different state from each plaintiff, even where the non-diverse defendant is impleaded through ancillary jurisdiction.

Facts
Plaintiff, a citizen of Iowa, filed suit against Omaha Public Power district, a Nebraska citizen, in federal district court, where the basis of federal court jurisdiction was diversity.  Respondent amended the complaint naming Defendant, an Iowa corporation, as an additional defendant.

Issue
Whether a federal court has ancillary jurisdiction over a third-party defendant named in an amended complaint in a suit in which complete diversity exists between the plaintiff and the original defendant, but where the newly named third-party defendant is a citizen of the same state that the plaintiff is.

Held
No. The judgment of the court of appeals was reversed.

Dissent
Justice Byron R. White (J. White) dissented, in which he was joined by Justice William J. Brennan (J. Brennan). Their dissent viewed Section: 1332 as only requiring complete diversity between the plaintiff and the parties he initially brings into the suit.  Thus they held that in a diversity case a federal court has power to entertain all claims among the parties arising from the same nucleus of operative facts as the plaintiff’s original claim against the defendant.

Discussion
This case was decided primarily out of respect for the limits of the reach of the federal government, particularly federal court jurisdiction.  In reaching its decision the Supreme Court of the United States (Supreme Court) recognized that federal courts are courts of limited jurisdiction and that these limits must neither be disregarded nor evaded.  Thus, by requiring complete jurisdiction between all parties, whether initial parties or third-parties later impleaded under ancillary jurisdiction, the Supreme Court is staying true that premise.

