Citation
458 S.W.2d 305, 1970 Mo. 41 A.L.R.3d 1386

Brief Fact Summary
The Architectural Board (the Board) in the City of Ladue refused to approve a building permit for a single family residence, which was unusual and “ultramodern” in design, but otherwise met all existing building and zoning ordinance standards. The Board had authority to approve plans which met appropriate standards of beauty and conformity. Berkley and other realtors (appellees) had been denied a permit by the building commissioner (Appellant) to construct the residence because of the Board did not approve of the design.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Aesthetic regulation by the Board was upheld as being in line with protecting neighborhood from adverse effect on general welfare and preservation of property values of a community. Not arbitrary or unreasonable use of police power.

Facts
The Architectural Board (the Board) in the City of Ladue refused to approve a building permit for a single family residence, which was unusual and “ultramodern” in design, but otherwise met all existing building and zoning ordinance standards. The Board had authority to approve plans which met appropriate standards of beauty and conformity. The Appellees had been denied a permit by the building commissioner (Appellant) to construct the residence because of the Board did not approve of Berkley’s proposed design. The surrounding homes were of colonial and French provincial style architecture. Appellees sought to build a pyramid shaped house.

Issue
Is the creation of the Board for promoting conformity of style and design authorized by the enabling statute?

Held
The statute provides that the city’s comprehensive plan be made with reasonable consideration for things like “character of the district”, “suitability for particular uses,” and “conserving the values of buildings.” The Court found this was in line with the Board’s mandate under the ordinance.

Discussion
The vagueness of the standards to be upheld by the Board would appear to be somewhat unpredictable in their application. However, the court decided it was tied enough to property values and the public welfare to not be arbitrary or capricious.

