Citation
22 Ill.37 Kan. 145, 14 P. 530 (1887)

Brief Fact Summary
Luther French (Plaintiff) brought an action for the partition of 200 acres of land against John Stone (Defendant) and others. The land in question was supposed to transfer upon the death of the owner, but the deed was never actually delivered.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The holding of an executed deed, which is to pass to another only at the death of the grantor, is ineffective for lack of delivery.

Facts
Plaintiff brought an action for the partition of 200 acres of land against Defendant and others. The land in question previously belonged to Francis French, who wrote a letter to his brother Dudley French to the effect that, “In case I should drop off, you can take possession of the land, and do with it as you please. When I have paid the land out, if not sold, I will make a deed to it to you, enclose it in envelope, direct it to you, to be mailed in event of death, which would make it sure to you without expense or trouble.” Francis French then signed a warranty deed to Dudley French, which was acknowledged before S. Michael, a justice of the peace, and the deed contained the words, “signed, sealed and delivered in the presence of S. Michaels” but the deed was never actually delivered. Francis French died owning the land in question, and left only several brothers as heirs, including the Plaintiff and Dudley French. The evidence showed that no one except for Michaels and Fran

Issue
The court expressed two issues:

Held
The deed was not valid for wanting delivery and the deed was void ab initio and could thus pass no title to the Defendant whatsoever, irrespective of his being a bona fide purchaser. Affirmed.

Discussion
Consider the circumstances of the transfer from Dudley French to Stone. The court noted that Dudley French was ill and could not even dress himself at times. Also, the land was sold for far less than market value. These factors, though the Court did not rule so, could be evidence of overreaching on the part of Stone. If Dudley’s faculties were so impaired that he could not make a valid contract, then Stone would take nothing. The court, by basing its ruling on the nature of the deed from Francis to Dudley, avoided the result of dispossessing Stone entirely.

