Citation
22 Ill.194 F. Supp. 12 (N.D. Cal. 1961)

Brief Fact Summary
In this case, the Plaintiff, Wineberg (Plaintiff), sued to quiet title and for other relief to 880 acres of land, which the Plaintiff alleged that he purchased from Barker in May 1948 for $6,000. However, the Plaintiff failed to record his deed until May 1951. In the interim between the Plaintiff’s purchase and recording, Barker made a contract for the sale of timber on the land to the Defendant, Construction Engineers (Defendant No. 1), the contract recorded in 1950. In 1951 Barker sold the property again deeding the property to the Defendant, Natural Resources, Inc. (Defendant No. 2) and that deed was likewise recorded prior to the Plaintiff’s deed. Also, several judgment creditors had obtained judgments against Barker during this period, some of which were also made Defendants.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Possession is notice not only of whatever title the occupant has, but also of whatever right he may have in the property. Also, the knowledge chargeable to a person after he is put on inquiry by possession of land is not limited to such knowledge as would be gained by examination of the public records.

Facts
In this case the Plaintiff sued to quiet title and for other relief to 880 acres of land, which the Plaintiff alleged that he purchased from Barker in May 1948 for $6,000, but the Plaintiff failed to record his deed until May 1951. In the interim, between the Plaintiff’s purchase and recording, Barker made a contract for the sale of timber on the land to Defendant No. 1. This contract was recorded in 1950. In 1951 Barker sold the property again deeding the property to Defendant No. 2 and that deed was likewise recorded prior to the Plaintiff’s deed. Also, several judgment creditors had obtained judgments against Barker during this period, some of which were also made Defendants.

Issue
Was the Plaintiff’s possession sufficient to impart notice to Defendant No. 1 and Defendant No. 2?

Held
Yes. Judgment awarded to the Plaintiff on the issue of title.

Discussion
This case provides further illustration of the need to promptly record deeds to property. The Plaintiff here was able to maintain his ownership despite his mistake in not recording the deed, but he had to go through a legal process, which requires money and time. It would have been far better for the Plaintiff to record his deed and avoid the aggravation of a quiet title suit.

