Citation
22 Ill. 334 U.S. 1, 68 S. Ct. 836, 92 L. Ed. 1161 (1948)

Brief Fact Summary
In 1911 a group of property owners signed a restrictive covenant prohibiting individuals who are not Caucasian from inhabiting the property they currently owned on a street front in St. Louis, for a term of fifty years. In 1945 Petitioners Shelly bought a pierce of property on this street without knowledge of the restrictive covenant. When the Petitioners attempted to inhabit this land, Kraemer and others party to the covenant (Respondents) sued to prevent the Petitioners from moving in.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Judicial intervention in enforcing restrictive covenants that deprives an individual of property rises to the level of a state action, and therefore affords the deprived individual the rights and privileges afforded by the Fourteenth Amendment.

Facts
This case joins together two cases, one from the Supreme Court of Missouri, and another from the Supreme Court of Michigan.

Issue
Whether the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment inhibits judicial enforcement by state courts of restrictive covenants based on race or color?<br />	Whether enforcement by state courts of the restrictive agreements in these cases may be deemed to be the acts of those States; and, if so, whether that action has denied these petitioners the equal protection of the laws which the Amendment was intended to insure?

Held
Yes and Yes. The judgment of the Supreme Court of Missouri is reversed.

Discussion
This case expands idea of state action to include those cases involving judicial enforcement of restrictive covenants. It can potentially be interpreted even more broadly to hold that all agreements requiring judicial intervention for enforcement, which are later enforced by judicial action can also rise to the level of state action under a Fourteenth Amendment analysis. But, this decision can also potentially be interpreted narrowly as the Court’s attempt to eliminate an abhorrent type of restrictive covenant that was used to racially segregate communities.

