Citation
100 Miss. 705, 56 So. 783, 1911 Miss.

Brief Fact Summary
Illinois Central R.R.’s (Defendant’s) train stuck a man’s wagon and the driver was killed instantly. Defendant saw the wagon on the track, 660 feet away. He could have stopped, but did not. Plaintiff claims that Defendant had the last clear chance to avoid the accident.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The party who last has a clear opportunity of avoiding the accident, notwithstanding the negligence of his opponent, is considered solely responsible for it.

Facts
A man, over seventy-years-old, was riding his one-horse wagon over a straight stretch of railroad track. Plaintiff had his head down and did not stop to look or listen for Defendant’s oncoming train. Defendant’s train was late and was traveling faster than usual. Plaintiff could see Defendant in plain view, on the track, about 660 feet away. Defendant could have stopped the light train within 200 feet. However, Defendant did not slow down. He blew his whistle twenty seconds before impact. Plaintiff was killed instantly. Plaintiff sued Defendant for negligence. In response to Defendant’s claim of contributory negligence, Plaintiff argued that Defendant had the last clear chance to avoid the accident. The trial court returned a verdict for Defendant. Plaintiff appealed.

Issue
Is Defendant, who has the last clear chance to avoid an accident, liable for the accident if he does not avoid it despite the negligence of his victim?

Held
Yes. Reversed and remanded.

Discussion
This case introduces the student to the last clear chance doctrine. For example, if a driver, while driving his car, sees a pedestrian cross the street in gross negligence, there is a duty upon that driver to avoid hitting the pedestrian. The driver cannot hit the pedestrian and then escape an award for damages because pedestrian was negligent. Driver saw the pedestrian, could have avoided him, and should have avoided him but he did not. Pedestrian is entitled to collect from driver irrespective of his contributory negligence.

