Citation
7 Cal. 3d 488, 498 P.2d 1043, 102 Cal. Rptr. 795, 1972 Cal.

Brief Fact Summary
Plaintiff, a longshoreman, was injured while he unloaded fishmeal sacks, which belonged to the United States Lines Co. (Defendant). Plaintiff knew the sacks were stacked in a dangerous manner, but he still attempted to unload them. The trial court found that both parties were negligent, therefore, Plaintiff was barred from recovery.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The burden of proving all aspects of the affirmative defense of contributory negligence, including causation, rests on the defendant, unless the elements of the defense may be inferred from the plaintiff’s evidence.

Facts
Plaintiff was injured while unloading fishmeal sacks for Defendant. Fishmeal is very difficult cargo to handle. Plaintiff had been assigned to break down the fishmeal sacks. Before he started, he noted that the sacks were not properly arranged. Plaintiff complained to Noel, Defendant’s chief marine clerk, that is was dangerous to proceed with the work in question. Plaintiff was told that there was nothing that could be done about it. Plaintiff did not speak to his own supervisor, even though the union contract with his employer provided that “[l]ongshoremen shall not be required to work when in good faith they believe that to do so is to immediately endanger health and safety” and established a grievance procedure “to determine whether a condition is safe or unsafe.” During the first three days, a large number of fishsacks fell, but no harm resulted. On the fourth day, twelve sacks fell simultaneously and one of them came towards Plaintiff. Plaintiff sustained injuries to his

Issue
Does Defendant bear the burden of proof in establishing Plaintiff’s contributory negligence?

Held
Yes. Judgment reversed. Case remanded with directions for a new trial on the limited issue of Plaintiff’s contributory negligence.

Discussion
Contributory negligence is an affirmative defense. Defendant has the burden of showing that Plaintiff’s failure to report was a substantial factor in bringing about Plaintiff’s harm.

