Citation
101 Nev. 105, 693 P.2d 1259 (1985)<br />

Brief Fact Summary
Rhonda Pepper (Plaintiff) was injured when Obstetrics & Gynecologists Ltd. (Defendant) prescribed an oral contraceptive. Plaintiff’s signature appeared on Defendant’s arbitration agreement. Defendant moved to order arbitration and to stay the lawsuit pending arbitration.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
There is no assumption of risk when a patient signs an agreement if the patient does not remember signing it and it was never explained to her.

Facts
Defendant requires its patients to sign an arbitration agreement, which provides that all disputes shall be submitted to binding arbitration. It was common procedure for Defendant’s receptionist to hand the patient the arbitration agreement along with two information sheets and inform him or her that any of their questions will be answered. The patient was required to sign before receiving treatment. If the patient refused to sign the arbitration agreement, then Defendant would refuse to give treatment. Plaintiff went to Defendant’s clinic to obtain a prescription for an oral contraceptive. Plaintiff suffered a cerebral incident, which left her paralyzed. Plaintiff’s signature is on Defendant’s arbitration agreement, but she did not remember signing it or having it explained to her. Defendant moved to order arbitration and to stay the lawsuit pending arbitration. The district court denied both motions. Defendant appealed.

Issue
If a patient signs an arbitration agreement without reading it or understanding it, does she assume the risk of the agreement?

Held
No. Judgment affirmed and case remanded for further proceedings.

Discussion
In this case, Plaintiff did not assume the risk of the terms of the arbitration agreement because she was not aware or made aware of its terms and consequences. The court applies the law of contracts. Meeting of the minds is a term used to describe offer and acceptance. This case is used to illustrate that in order to assume a risk, you must be aware or made aware of the risk.

