Citation
135 Ariz. 604, 663 P.2d 596 (Ct. App. 1983)

Brief Fact Summary
The Superior Court of Pima County (Arizona) found in favor of the Appellees, Julian Roy Garcia and Susan J. Garcia (Appellees), a police officer and dependents, in connection with a claim that the Appellant, the City of South Tucson (Appellant), was responsible for the police officer’s injuries after the officer was shot by the Appellant’s own officer during a raid in which the police officer was assisting the city under a mutual aid agreement. The Appellant city challenged the decision.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The test to determine whether one doing work for another is an “independent contractor” or “employee” within the Workmen’s Compensation Act is whether the alleged employer retains control over the method of reaching the required result or whether the employer’s control is limited to the result reached, leaving the method to the other party.

Facts
In October 1978, a team of officers from two Arizona law enforcement agencies surrounded a house occupied by a lone gunman who was randomly firing on the surrounding environment. A member of one agency, the City of South Tucson Police Department, shot one of the team, Officer Garcia of the City of Tucson Police Department, in the back. The Appellee was paralyzed and brought an action against the Appellant city. A jury found for the Appellee and awarded damages.

Issue
* Was the officer’s sole remedy Worker’s Compensation, predicated on his being Appellee’s employee, thus disallowing his negligence claim?<br />* Did the “fireman’s rule” prevent the officer from recovering damages?<br />* Should the jury have been given instructions concerning “assumption of risk” and “sudden emergency” doctrines?

Held
The court affirmed the trial court’s judgment in favor of the Appellees, holding with regard to each issue as follows:

Discussion
The Appellant city offered three arguments: (1) the city and the police officer’s were engaged in a joint venture; (2) the city was a statutory employer of the police officer and (3) the trial court failed to submit jury issues on assumption of risk and sudden emergency. The Arizona Court of Appeals rejected all three.

