Citation
86 Wis. 2d 762, 290 N.W.2d 518 (Ct. App. 1979)

Brief Fact Summary
The Wisconsin Court of Appeals reversed an order dismissing a Claimant’s application for compensation from the State Department of Industry under Wisconsin’s Worker’s Compensation statute. Petitioner employer appealed the decision.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Wisconsin’s Worker’s Compensation statute covers employees injured while in a parking lot owned or maintained by the employer for the convenience of its employees but does not cover employees injured while walking from the employer’s parking lot to the work premises.

Facts
While walking on the direct path between the parking lot and his work premises, Kretschmann was attacked by unknown assailants. He was on his way to work the 2:00 a.m. shift on a sidewalk adjacent to his employer’s place of business, and was about 50 feet from the entrance when he was attacked.

Issue
Was plaintiff entitled to coverage pursuant to the workman’s compensation statute?

Held
The Court reversed the lower court’s order and dismissed respondent’s application; respondent was not entitled to coverage under the worker’s compensation statute because although he was walking on the direct path to his workplace, he was not walking from the company parking lot.

Dissent
The dissent finds the majority’s strict construction of the statute problematic, stating, “[T]he Worker’s Compensation Act, like any remedial statute, ’should be liberally construed in favor of including all service that can in any sense be said to reasonably come within it.’” The dissent finds the majority’s interpretation not only unfair, but exclusionary, noting, “Kretschmann was injured he was located on the same route an employee would take if he used the parking lot, and walked to the employer’s premises on a direct route. The difference between Kretschmann, and employees who drove to work, is that since Kretschmann took public transit his starting point was not the parking lot but a bus stop,” and thus, “the question becomes whether, liberally construed, the phrase ‘going between an employer’s designated parking lot and the employer’s work premises while on a direct route’ should be interpreted as creating an area at the premises in which recovery to injured employees

Discussion
This decision is primarily one of strict statutory interpretation and the purview of the court. To that end, the court noted, “Questions of law, including the interpretation and application of a statute, are reviewable by the court. No deference will be accorded an agency finding when the finding is based entirely on uncontroverted evidence.” In overruling a state agency, the court asserted, “The court is in as good a position as the agency to make findings of fact where the evidence is undisputed and the credibility of witnesses is not in issue.” Nevertheless, the court does limit its jurisdiction, pointing out, “Because the law of worker’s compensation is wholly statutory, public policy questions concerning its scope and fairness are for the legislature rather than the courts.” However, the court continued, “When the statutory language is unambiguous, the intention of the legislature must be arrived at by giving the language its ordinary and accepted meaning.”

