Citation
61 Ohio St. 3d 486, 575 N.E.2d 428, 10 IER Cases 1760, 63 FEP Cases 570

Brief Fact Summary
The Court of Appeals for Hamilton County (Ohio) affirmed an order from the trial court that granted summary judgment for the Appellee employer, Porter Paint Co. (Appellee), in the employee’s action for sexual harassment. The Appellant employee challenged the decision.<span class="heading">Synopsis of Rule of Law.</span> Where a plaintiff brings a claim against an employer predicated upon allegations of workplace sexual harassment by a company employee and where there is evidence in the record suggesting that the employee has a past history of sexually harassing behavior about which the employer knew or should have known, summary judgment may not be granted in favor of the employer, even where the employee’s actions in no way further or promote the employer’s business.

Facts
The Appellants were Mr. and Mrs. Kerans (Appellants). Mrs. Kerans worked for a retail outlet owned by the Appellee and alleged the store manager sexually harassed her. Mrs. Kerans reported the incidents and the manager subsequently resigned. The Appellants filed a claim against the Appellee. The Appellants settled the claim against the Appellees’ store manager, but expressly reserved their right to bring action against the company, which they did filing a complaint containing five counts. The trial court granted summary judgment. The court of appeals affirmed. The Ohio Supreme Court reversed the judgment as to all the causes of action, except the first because it essentially duplicated of the other claims. The court held that the employee’s claims for sexual harassment were not barred by the exclusivity provision of the Workers’ Compensation Act (the Act) and further that there were disputed issues of fact as to whether the supervisor was acting in the scope of his employment

Issue
Is a claim of sexual harassment barred by the exclusive remedy provision of the Act?

Held
No. The court held that the Appellants’ claims for sexual harassment were not barred by the exclusivity provision of the Act, stating that where an employee alleges sexual harassment by another employee and there is evidence in the record suggesting that the employee has a past history of sexually harassing behavior about which the employer knew or should have known, summary judgment may not be granted in favor of the employer.<span class="heading">Dissent.</span> The dissent takes the view that, while the majority’s intention of providing relief for sexual harassment victims is noble, he could not “join the majority in its creation of a new tort against an employer which has no foundation in common law.” In particular the dissenting Justice takes issue with what he sees as a haphazard cobbling together of disparate elements of statutory construction, stating: “[T]ort law does provide remedies for victims of sexual harassment. For example, actions have been brought under the theories of assault and battery. However, these claims each have their own distinct elements, which may not be blurred by lumping them into a general claim for sexual harassment.” Finally, the dissent sees such application as being in contravention of present statutory aims: “Either an expansive interpretation of the intentional tort exception or the development of new negligent tort actions would thwart the basic purpose of the statutory and constitutional scheme

Discussion
In addition to the necessary distinction to be drawn between types of injuries covered by workman’s compensation statutes, the court in Kerans must address a number of corollary issues. The primary of which is a general one, the degree of responsibility an employer holds for worker safety. The court stated broadly, “An employer has a duty to provide its employees with a safe work environment and, thus, may be independently liable for failing to take corrective action against an employee who poses a threat of harm to fellow employees, even where the employee’s actions do not serve or advance the employer’s business goals.” More specifically, with regard to the applicability of the exclusive remedy provision, the court returned to the “types of injuries” analysis, stating, “A physical injury occasioned solely by mental or emotional stress received in the course of employment is an ‘injury’ within the definition,” however, the court clarified, the applicable statute “state [

