Citation
867 F.2d 79 (1st Cir.1989)

Brief Fact Summary
Defendant Widow Sandra Porter-Englehart (Defendant Widow) of Testator Manfred Owen Englehart (Testator) appeals a lower court ruling in favor of Defendant Ex-Wife Merle (Defendant Ex-Wife) in a dispute about the proper division of insurance proceeds

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The creation of a trust does not depend on the words used, but rather on the clear intention of the parties to create the trust.

Facts
Testator had four children with Defendant Ex-Wife. In 1969, Defendant Ex-Wife and Testator were divorced. Notwithstanding, Testator executed a will in December, 1973, bequeathing his residuary estate to Defendant Ex-Wife as trustee for their children. The will contained the terms of the trust. Testator received two insurance policies from his employer in 1974. Later in 1974, Testator married Defendant Widow. This marriage, by operation of law, revoked the will executed prior to the marriage. Evidence indicated that Testator was unaware of this revocation that occurred as a matter of law. Testator named as the beneficiaries of his insurance policies Defendant Ex-Wife as trustee for his children (with a 70% beneficiary allocation) and Defendant Widow (with a 30% beneficiary allocation). Six months later, Testator was killed in a car accident. Plaintiff Insurance Company (Plaintiff) brought this matter to settle the insurance policy disbursements. Defendant Ex-Wife contends that

Issue
Did the revocation as a matter of law due to marriage of a will that establishes a trust comprised of insurance proceeds vitiate the beneficiary designations of the insurance policies?

Held
No. The insurance policy beneficiaries stand as designated by Testator, regardless of the revocation as a matter of law of Testator’s will. A life insurance policy is a not a will but a contract entered into between the insured on one side, and the insurance company. The policy proceeds are to be paid to the beneficiary designated within the contract. Therefore, money so paid does not pass by will, or by the laws that regulate intestate succession. Instead, satisfying the beneficiary is the contractual responsibility of the insurer, not the fiduciary responsibility of the administrator. Life insurance policies may create valid trusts. Such trusts, however, are inter vivos and not testamentary. This is because the trusts pass present interests created by contract and not by will. The rights of the beneficiary of the life insurance policies are vested when the designation is made in accordance with the terms of the contract of the insurance. They take complete effect that that ti

Discussion
Again, the court here seeks to fulfill the testator’s intent. Since the testator seemed not to be aware of the revocation of his will as a matter of law because of his marriage, there is no evidence that Testator intended to revoke the named beneficiaries of his insurance policies.

