Citation
432 F.3d 1 (1st Cir. 2005)

Brief Fact Summary
In a securities fraud action in which the buyer (Plaintiff) of PolyMedica (Defendant) stock alleged that PolyMedica had made inaccurate statements that affected the value of its stock, the district court certified the action as a class action because the fraud-on-market assumption of reliance was appropriate due to there being abundantevidence that the market involved was proficient. PolyMedica argued that the district court used the wrong standard of market efficiency and so also made a mistake including evidence presented by PolyMedica as immaterial.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
(1) In applying fraud-on-the-market presumption of reliance in resolutions regarding granting class certifications, for evaluation purposes a trial court may have to look beyond the pleadings. (2) An efficient market, regarding application of the fraud-on-the-market theory, is one in which the market price of the stock is totally transparent regarding all information made available to the public.

Facts
PolyMedica Corp. (PolyMedica) was the parent of Liberty Medical Supply, Inc. (Liberty). Allegedly, over the course of eight months, PolyMedica falsely reported substantial gains in Liberty's business(accounting for roughly 80% of PolyMedica's profits) stated by a PolyMedicastock buyer. Traded on the NASDAQ and American Stock Exchange, these reports then led to considerable gains in PolyMedica'sstock and purportedlyinfluenced the buyer to purchase artificially inflated stock.  Once the truth came out, the value of PolyMedica'sstock plunged by 80%. The buyer filed suit and sought class certification, alleging that because of PolyMedica’s misstatement of sale figures, accounts receivable, earnings and fake press releases, that others in similar situations also purchased artificially inflated PolyMedica stock. The buyer stated that common questions of law and fact prevailed based on the fraud-on-the-market theory, which removes the need for a plaintiff to prove individualized reliance on a defendant’s misrepresentation by allowing a class-wide rebuttable presumption of reliance, thuspermitting a securities fraud class action to meet the commonalityobligation needed for class action certification. PolyMedica,contending that the fraud-on-the-market presumption of reliance was not applicable for the eight-month timeframe at issue (the "Contested Time Period") due to themarket for PolyMedicastockfailing to meet the “efficiency” condition needed for applying presumption, opposed the motion. While both sides offered expert testimony supporting their individual stances, the buyer's expert depended on five widely accepted market-efficiency elements and determined that PolyMedicastockmarket was efficient and depending on three different elements, PolyMedica's expert, arrived at the opposite conclusion. The trial court disallowed the evidence provided by PolyMedica'sexpert as immaterial, and granted the buyer's motion to certify the class for the whole proposed class period. By allowing this, the district court went past the four corners of the pleadings, bearing in mindthat each party had expert’s statements and hundreds of pages of exhibits fixated on market efficiency. An interlocutory appeal was filed by PolyMedica, and review was granted by the court of appeals.

Issue
(1) In applying fraud-on-the-market presumption of reliance in resolutions regarding granting class certifications, for evaluation purposes,may a trial court have to look beyond the pleadings? (2) Is an efficient market, regarding application of the fraud-on-the-market theory, one in which the market price of the stock is totally transparent regarding all information made available to the public?

Held
(1) Yes. In applying fraud-on-the-market presumption of reliance in resolutions regarding granting class certifications, for evaluation purposes, a trial court may have to look beyond the pleadings.Reviewing case law from another jurisdiction the buyer contends that a district court should restrain from weighing competing evidence, like experts' reports, at the class-certification stage, and instead should restrict its review to the plaintiff’s complaint claims. This is due to the fact that courts may fail to perform a preliminary inquiry into the value of a suit to decide if it may be upheld as a class action. In regards to addressing this issue, the majority of courts of appeals have ruled that a district court is not restricted to the claims mentioned in the complaint and should raise any factual and legalqueries needed to make an informed determination of the certification issues.  This stance, adopted by PolyMedica, is based on the idea that determining class usually includes deliberations that are entangled in the factual and legal issues encompassing the plaintiff s cause of action and at times the court will need to investigate behind the pleadings prior to reaching the certification question. The majority approach is followed by this court, allowing the district court to go beyond the pleadings on grounds that it has to create a projection as to how particular concerns will play out in hopes of deciding if individual or common issues prevail in a certain case. Also, if and when the class action would be appropriate on one premise but not another, a court has the authority to test doubtful premises early on. So, the district court was authorized to investigate behind the pleadings to determine if the fraud-on-the-market presumption of reliance was applicable, and its class-certification questions resolution. Affirmed as to this issue.

Discussion
Deciding if a market is fundamental value efficient is a far more technical inquiry than defining informational efficiency itself. Contingent on the technique of assessment utilized, a stock’s fundamental value begins avaluation of various factors, including currentprocedures, upcoming growths rates, comparative risk levels, and the future levels of interest rates. Although, even some of the tests that claim to measure how closely prices reflect valuehave been extremely controversial, such as those which measure whether the variability of prices is greater than the variability of dividends over time, and observers have noticed that stock prices frequently and significantly meander away from current value models and also from financial variables that seem to provide a wealth of information pertinent to a computation of fundamental value. While others have mentioned that a “major drawback to fundamental value theory is that it requires a great deal of specific, sometimes unobtainable, information” which appears as though the court’s detention of its standard of efficiency to informational efficiency is partially due to an effort to evade at the class certification stage an examination of evidence that concernsintricate, technical, and provocativetheories so as to escape a mini-trial at that stage.

