Brief Fact Summary
A class of investors (Class) (Plaintiff) claimed that Cendant Corp. (Cendant) (Defendant) and its officers, directors and accountant made misstatements about Cendant in the midst of a tender offer for shares of American Bankers Insurance Group, Inc. (ABI) common stock that falsely inflated the price at which Cendant bought its shares and once revealed, the merger was defunct and the Class sustained a succeeding loss as a result of the inaccurate statements.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
(1) In order to demonstrate that the purported misstatement was stated "in connection with" the buying or selling of a security, a plaintiff needs to demonstrate the dispersion methods and the significance of the purported misstatement, in an action under § 10(b) of the Securities Exchange Act, and Rule 10b-5 thereunder, which includes the public dispersion of a purported misstatement into an efficient securities market.

Facts
A class of investors (Class) claimed that Cendant Corp. (Cendant) and its directors, officers, and accountant made misstatements regarding Cendant throughout a tender offer for shares of American Bankers Insurance Group, Inc. (ABI) common stock resulting in falsely raising the price the Class bought its shares of ABI,and when disclosed, the misstatements triggered the expiration of the merger contract and a ensuing loss for the investors. In early 1998, Cendantprovided a competing tender offer for ABI at $58 per share and in accordance with its tender offer, Cendant filed with the Securities Exchange Commission (SEC) a Schedule l4D-l that exaggerated its earnings in previous financial reporting periods. American International Group, Inc. (AIG) reacted by making an identicaltender offer and Cendant changed its offer to $67 per share. Cendantproceeded to engage in a merger agreement with ABI. On April 15, 1998, Cendant declared that its previous financial reports were not dependable as a result of accounting abnormalities found, and that the abnormalities were present in just one unit, accounting for less than a third of Cendant'stake-homerevenue. On the heels of the declaration, ABI stock price declined about 11%. Afterwards, Cendant continued to state that it planned on finishing the ABI merger. In July 1998, Cendantdisclosed that the April declaration contained errors, stating that the true revenue loss would be double the amount initially reported, and that more abnormalities in other units have been found.Cendantdistributedadditional press releases along with an audit report, more press releases and an audit report that specified there had been fraudulent financial reportingin August 1998. Following the filing of the audit with the SEC the ABI common stock price fell further. Cendant filed an amended Form 10-K for 1997 in September of 1998declaring losses of $217.2 million, instead of profits of $55.5 million, and the price of ABI dropped yet again. Finally in October 1998, Cendant and ABI reported that they were ending the merger. ABI stock plummeted once again, this time the investors filed suit under § 10(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (Act) and Rule 10b-5 thereunder. The district court dismissed the action for failure to state a claim, clarifying that the complaint did not establish that the Class’s buying of ABI common stock was not done in connection with the making of the purported misstatement s, that the Class relied on the misstatement s, and that the Classendured a loss as the proximate result of the allegedmisstatement s. The court of appeals granted review.

Issue
(1) In order to demonstrate that the purported misstatement was stated "in connection with" the buying or selling of a security, does a plaintiff need to demonstrate the dispersion methods and the significance of the purported misstatement, in an action under § 10(b) of the Securities Exchange Act, and Rule 10b-5 thereunder, which includes the public dispersion of a purported misstatement into an efficient securities market?

Held
(Alarcon, J.) (1) Yes. In order to demonstrate that the purported misstatement was stated "in connection with" the buying or selling of a security, a plaintiff needs to demonstrate the dispersion methods and the significance of the purported misstatement, in an action under § 10(b) of the Securities Exchange Act, and Rule 10b-5 thereunder, which includes the public dispersion of a purported misstatement into an efficient securities market. The proper standard is one that takes into account the context in which the purported misstatement was made and in cases like the one here, necessitates proof of the significance of the misstatement and how it was dispersed. With standards like this it does not matter if the misstatements were made with the intent to influence the investment choice of market participants. This standard of making certain that investors attain full and fair disclosure of significant information in connection with their securities transaction choices furthers the purpose of § 10(b) and Rule 10b-5. The Classmerely has to demonstrate that the misstatements were significant when dispersed, that they were dispersed to the public through a medium on which reasonable investors would depend and that it was done so in a reckless fashion, under this standard. The purported misstatements being made in the context of a proposed merger and tender offer is no defense due to the information at issue with a tender offer may be significant to persons who trade securities of the target company. This court, though, fails to resolve if the "in connection with" requirement is fulfilled in the instant case-the matter will be remanded to the district court for a determination like that.

Discussion
Here, the courtstressed that it had not determined if the complaint had fulfilled the “in connection with” obligation, instead simply establishing the standard for the district court to follow on remand. The “in connectionwith” obligation is multifaceted, as showcased here. Many lower courts have interpreted this obligation as necessitating some connection between the fraud and the buying or selling of a security. The trouble has been in classifying how close the connection must be. Numerous courts require a presentation of reliance and loss of causation/ proximate cause, where plaintiffs must also demonstratethe “in connection with” component.

