Citation
22 Ill.356 U.S. 525, 78 S. Ct. 893, 2 L. Ed. 2d 953 (1958)

Brief Fact Summary
Plaintiff, a resident of North Carolina, sued Defendant, a South Carolina corporation, in South Carolina federal court for negligence. A jury returned a verdict for Plaintiff. Defendant appealed, arguing that the question of whether Defendant was immune from suit pursuant to the South Carolina Workmen’s Compensation Law was to be decided by the judge, not the jury according to South Carolina law.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
When a state law conflicts with a federal law and the state law does not involve rights and obligations, the federal law must be applied. The court should not only look to whether the state law would be “outcome determinative” but also whether applying the state law would hinder the functioning of the federal court.

Facts
Byrd (Plaintiff), a resident of North Carolina, sued Blue Ridge Rural Electric Cooperative, Inc. (Defendant), a South Carolina corporation, for negligence in federal court in South Carolina. Plaintiff was injured while working for a construction contractor that had a subcontract with Defendant. Defendant asserted an affirmative defense that Plaintiff was barred from suit under the South Carolina Workmen’s Compensation Act because Plaintiff was a “statutory employee” and must accept statutory compensation as his exclusive remedy. The jury returned a verdict for Plaintiff.  The Court of Appeals reversed and directed judgment for Defendant, holding that Plaintiff was in fact a statutory employee. Plaintiff appealed, arguing that the Court of Appeals should have remanded to give Plaintiff an opportunity to introduce further evidence. On appeal, the United States Supreme Court held in favor of Plaintiff and addressed an additional question of whether there should be a bench trial (as would be the case under South Carolina law) or a jury trial (as required in federal court by the 7th Amendment).

Issue
When state law conflicts with federal law in determining whether an action should be tried by a judge or jury, which law should control where the case is to be tried in a federal court exercising diversity jurisdiction?

Held
A federal court should conduct jury trials when required by the 7th Amendment. Reversed and remanded.   The policy of uniform enforcement of state-created rights and obligations cannot require compliance with a state rule that does not involve rights and obligations of its citizens and disrupts the federal system of allocating functions between judge and jury. This policy would alter the essential character and function of a federal court.  Although a judge may reach a different decision than a jury in this case, state law is not applied in every situation where doing so might be    outcome determination. Rather, federal interests, such as conformity with the 7th Amendment must be considered.  Because this rule is procedural and the conflict interferes with federal functions, it is not considered a decision under the Rules of Decision Act.

Discussion
Although the test for determining whether a state law should be applied under Erie is whether it is “outcome determinative,” the court must weigh the state’s interests in applying its own law against the federal interest in applying federal law.

