Citation
22 Ill.18 N.J. 41, 112 A.2d 553 (1955)

Brief Fact Summary
The decedent wrote a note prior to death which directed her husband to certain money, a savings account and shares in a building and loan association. The husband would not have received the property under the decedent’s will and the Plaintiffs, those responsible for carrying out the will, sued the husband to recover the property.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The doctrine of gift causa mortis is subject to strict requirements, including delivery, which are necessary to limit the application of the doctrine due to the fact that it intrudes on the statute of wills.

Facts
Decedent Ethel Reiss and Defendant Adam Reiss were married in 1940. Subsequent to the marriage, Decedent executed a will which left Defendant with one dollar and the residue of the Decedent’s estate to her children and grandchildren. Decedent and Defendant separated in 1946 and entered into an agreement concerning their respective rights to certain land. Thereafter, in 1948, the couple reconciled and co-habitated until Decedent’s death in 1951 at the age of 66. In April of 1951 Decedent was put in the hospital for major surgery. Prior to going into the surgery Decedent wrote a note in her native Hungarian to her husband, the Defendant. The note gave the directions to money which was hidden in the house the couple shared, gave instructions to a savings account, and gave directions to a book which showed shares in a building and loan association. The note also referenced where Decedent’s will was to be found. The Decedent told a friend in the hospital to direct her husband to th

Issue
Does the note written by the Decedent constitute a valid gift causa mortis of the property described therein to the Defendant?

Held
No. The judgment of the intermediate appellate court is reversed and the judgment of the trial court in favor of the Plaintiffs is reinstated.

Dissent
The doctrine of gift causa mortis is by its nature an emergency form of donation, and it is therefore present in cases where the actual delivery can often not be made and the Decedent does not have the ability to execute formal documents. In this case, the Decedent could not do any more than she did to effect her intent, thus, the gift should be held valid.

Discussion
In cases where there is a will which clearly expresses one desire and another, less formal, writing which expresses another desire, the courts will general find favor with the formal writing. This is because the formal writing is witnessed and is not as susceptible to questions of the capacity of the donor.

