Citation
653 F.3d 720 (8th Cir. 2011)

Brief Fact Summary
Elliott Kaplan (Plaintiff) and his wife filed suit against Mayo Clinic Rochester, Inc., other Mayo entities (referred to collectively as "Mayo") (Defendant) and Mayo doctors David Nagorney and Lawrence Burgart, making a number of claims that arose from Plaintiff's incorrect diagnosis of pancreatic cancer and his surgery based on that diagnosis.  The Kaplans (Plaintiff) appealed after they lost a motion for summary judgment against one doctor and a jury verdict later for Defendant.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A plaintiff's breach of contract action is sufficiently supported when damages result from the promise of a physician to perform a certain procedure and his failure to do so.

Facts
Following complaints of severe abdominal pain, Elliott Kaplan (Plaintiff) was brought to the hospital where testing was ordered by his family physician.  The hospital pathologist reported that a CT scan and needle biopsy were consistent with cancer.  Plaintiff was referred to Mayo Clinic Rochester, Inc., and specifically, to Drs. Nagorney and Burgart (referred to collectively as "Mayo" (Defendant).  Dr. Nagorney (Defendant), a surgeon, agreed to treat Plaintiff and requested from him the hospital records and biopsy slides that the pathologists had examined.  Dr. Burgart (Defendant), a pathologist, reviewed the needle biopsy slides and provided a written diagnosis that indicated cancer.  Dr. Nagorney (Defendant) reviewed Dr. Burgart's (Defendant) report and informed Plaintiff he had pancreatic cancer that was deadly and aggressive, and he recommended that a "Whipple procedure" be performed.  This procedure involves removing part of the pancreas and stomach, as well as the duodenum.  Following the surgery, Dr. Burgart (Defendant) and the other Mayo (Defendant) pathologists examined the removed pancreatic tissue, and found that Plaintiff had not had cancer after all.  Plaintiff and his wife filed suit against Mayo (Defendant) and Drs. Nagorney (Defendant) and Burgart (Defendant), based on the incorrect diagnosis of pancreatic cancer and the surgery that followed.  The district court granted summary judgment in favor of Dr. Nagorney (Defendant), and the case went on to trial against the other defendants on claims of breach of contract and negligent failure to diagnose.  At the conclusion of Plaintiffs' case-in-chief, the district court granted judgment as a matter of law against them on the breach-of-contract claim.  The jury returned a verdict for Mayo (Defendant) and Dr. Burgart (Defendant) on the Kaplan's claim for negligent failure to diagnose, and the district court entered judgment on that verdict.  The Plaintiffs then appealed the judgments in favor of Mayo (Defendant) and Dr. Burgart (D) on their negligent failure-to-diagnose and contract claims.

Issue
Is a plaintiff's breach of contract action sufficiently supported when damages result from the promise of a physician to perform a certain procedure and his failure to do so?

Held
(Arnold, J.)  Yes. A plaintiff's breach of contract action is sufficiently supported when damages result from the promise of a physician to perform a certain procedure and his failure to do so.  The expert testimony presented by the parties at trial conflicted as to whether the biopsy slides that Dr. Burgart (Defendant) relied on supported his diagnosis of pancreatic cancer, as to the harm suffered by Plaintiff caused by the Whipple procedure, and as to whether Dr. Nagorney (Defendant) had promised that he would do an intraoperative biopsy in order to determine whether Plaintiff had cancer and forego the procedure if results of the biopsy showed he did not.  The court rejected evidentiary claims of the Plaintiff—that documents and photographs referring to insurance were not properly admitted into evidence and that leaving an expert's name out of the jury instructions was an obvious error.

Discussion
When suing a doctor, the difference between a breach of contract and negligence claim are of important significance.  In Kaplan, the doctors may have performed at adequate standards of care and therefore defeated malpractice claims, but contractual liability was created with the promise to perform a specific procedure.  The lower court was incorrect to rush a ruling that the tort claim only mirrored the negligence tort claim.  Each cause of action is distinct, and accordingly, the defenses to each are different.

