Citation
22 Ill.512 U.S. 374, 114 S. Ct. 2309, 129 L. Ed. 2d 304, 38 ERC 1769 (1994)

Brief Fact Summary
In this case Dolan (Petitioner) challenges the decision of the Supreme Court of Oregon, which held that the City of Tigard could condition the approval of her building permit on the dedication of a portion of her property for flood control and traffic improvements.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
No precise mathematical calculation is required, but the city must make some sort of individualized determination that the required dedication is related both in nature and extent to the impact of the proposed development.

Facts
Petitioner owns a plumbing and electrical supply store on Main Street in Tigard, Oregon. Fanno Creek flows through the southwestern corner of the lot, and the year round flow of the creek places the area within the Fanno Creek 100-year floodplain. The building on the lot is presently 9,700 square feet. Oregon enacted a comprehensive land use management program in 1973. The program required cities in Oregon to adopt comprehensive land use plans, which were consistent with the statewide planning goals. The City of Tigard made its land use law the Community Development Code and required, after a transportation study, new development to facilitate a plan for pedestrian/ bicycle paths by dedicating land for same. Also, Tigard adopted a Master Drainage Plan, which noted that flooding had been a problem in several areas along Fanno Creek, including areas near Petitioner’s property. The Master Drainage Plan found that the increased urbanization had increased impervious areas and that

Issue
Were the requirements placed on Petitioner as a condition of her permit to rebuild on her property reasonably related to the redevelopment?

Held
No. Reversed.

Dissent
Both of the dissents essentially find fault with the majority’s shifting of the burden of proof to the governmental entity seeking to uphold the regulation. The dissents would not abandon the traditional presumption of constitutionality in favor of the government.

Discussion
The property owner does not have nearly the resources of the governmental entity whose regulation is being challenged. The governmental entity can perhaps better afford to commission land use studies, which tend to buttress their regulations.

