Citation
22 Ill.483 U.S. 825, 107 S. Ct. 3141, 97 L. Ed. 2d 677, 26 ERC 1073 (1987)

Brief Fact Summary
The Nollans (Appellants) have appealed from a decision of the California Court of Appeal, which ruled that the California Coastal Commission could condition its grant of permission to rebuild their house on the transfer to the public of an easement across their beachfront property.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Land use regulation does not constitute a taking if it substantially advances legitimate state interests and does not deny an owner economically viable use of his land.

Facts
The Appellants own a beachfront lot in Ventura County, California. Nearby there is an oceanside public park and a public beach. A concrete seawall separates the beach portion of the Nollans’ property from the rest of the lot. Originally, the Nollans leased their lot with an option to buy. There was a small bungalow on the lot, which after many years of renting out to vacationers, had fallen into disrepair. The Nollans’ option to purchase was conditioned on their promise to demolish the bungalow and replace it. Under the California Public Resources Code, the Nollans were required to obtain a coastal development permit from the California Coastal Commission. In 1982, the Nollans submitted a permit application to the Commission, which proposed to demolish their bungalow and replace it with a three-bedroom home, which was in keeping with the rest of the neighborhood. The Commission granted the application, but placed a condition on the approval, which was that the Nollans were req

Issue
Does the requirement of the easement to be conveyed as a condition for issuing a land use permit constitute a taking?

Held
Yes. Reversed.

Dissent
The dissent holds that the condition does not amount to a taking because the Nollans’ proposed building blocks visual access, while the Commission seeks to preserve lateral access, and those two concerns are closely enough related to be rational.

Discussion
The dissent points out the narrowness of the majority opinion. However, the majority opinion’s rule seems to have the beneficial effect of ensuring governmental agencies act within their narrow grants of power.

