Citation
22 Ill.533 U.S. 606, 121 S. Ct. 2448, 150 L. Ed. 2d 592, 52 ERC 1609 (2001)

Brief Fact Summary
In 1959, Palazzolo (Petitioner) and associates formed Shore Gardens, Inc. (SGI) and purchased parcels of land, which bordered a pond, other houses and was a marsh subject to tidal flooding. After trying to gain approval from the Rhode Island Division of Harbors and Rivers (DHR) for two development projects, which were not approved, the land was designated by the Council, an agency charged with the duty of protecting the state’s coastal properties, as protected “coastal wetlands.” Then, in 1983, Petitioner succeeded to ownership of the property by virtue of the dissolution of SGI.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
It would be illogical and unfair to bar a regulatory takings claim because of the post-enactment transfer of ownership where the steps necessary to make the claim ripe were not taken, or could not have been taken, by a previous owner.

Facts
In 1959, Petitioner and associates formed Shore Gardens, Inc. (SGI) and purchased parcels of land, which bordered a pond and other houses, but the land was salt marsh subject to tidal flooding. After trying to gain approval from the Rhode Island Division of Harbors and Rivers (DHR) for two development projects, which were not approved, the land was designated by the Council, an agency charged with the duty of protecting the state’s coastal properties, as protected “coastal wetlands.” Then, in 1983, Petitioner succeeded to ownership of the property by virtue of the dissolution of SGI. Then Petitioner made an application to the Council requesting permission to build a wooden bulkhead along the shore of the pond and to fill the entire marsh area. The Council rejected the application because it was vague and inadequate for a project of that size. The agency also found that proposal would have significant impacts on the waters and wetlands of the pond, and that the proposal would c

Issue
Was the Petitioner deprived of all economic value of his property?

Held
No. Affirmed in part and reversed in part.

Dissent
One portion of the dissent would hold that the Petitioner’s claims were not ripe, while another portion of the dissent would hold that Petitioner is without standing.

Discussion
The student should be aware of the investment-backed expectations consideration for a claim analyzed under Penn Central v. New York, especially the reasonableness of the expectations. Although prior enactment of the wetlands act is not a bar to a claim, one must question how much the Petitioner could have reasonably expected to gain from the property, which he succeeded to, in light of the regulatio

