Citation
22 Ill.439 U.S. 883, 99 S. Ct. 226, 58 L. Ed. 2d 198 (1978)

Brief Fact Summary
Penn Central (Appellant) owned the Grand Central Terminal, which was designated by application of New York’s Landmarks Preservation Law to be a landmark. Thereafter, the Appellant entered into a renewable 50-year lease with UGP Properties, Ltd., a United Kingdom company, under which the UGP agreed to construct a multistory office building on top of the terminal. The plans for the new office building were submitted to the Commission for approval, which was denied.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
In deciding whether a particular government action has effected a taking, this Court focuses both on the character of the action and the nature and extent of the interference with rights in the parcel as a whole.

Facts
Appellant owned the Grand Central Terminal, which was designated by application of New York’s Landmarks Preservation Law to be a landmark. Thereafter, the Appellant entered into a renewable 50-year lease with UGP Properties, Ltd., a United Kingdom company, under which the UGP agreed to construct a multistory office building on top of the terminal. The plans for the new office building were submitted to the Commission for approval, which was denied. The plans were in conformity with existing zoning regulation, but the Commission of Landmarks Preservation nonetheless denied the applications for certificates of “no external effect” and for “appropriateness.” The Appellants did not pursue any administrative remedies because none were available. The Appellants did not decide to submit other plans to the Commission, either. Instead, the Appellants filed suit in state court seeking a declaratory judgment, injunctive relief barring the City from using the Landmarks Law to impede the c

Issue
Has a taking occurred?

Held
No. Affirmed.

Dissent
The dissent would not equate the Landmarks Law with a zoning regulation. The dissent points out that the effect of the Landmarks Law is to place an affirmative duty on the owner of a designated property to maintain the property as a landmark at his own expense.

Discussion
This case should be read closely as it contains an excellent discussion of the permissible scope of zoning regulations and the requirements for finding that a taking has occurred. The Court did stretch a bit to uphold the Landmarks Law based on its analogy to zoning.

