Citation
525 Pa. 392,581 A.2d 162,1990 Pa.

Brief Fact Summary
Appellant and appellee entered into a prenuptial agreement prior to marriage that expressly disallowed alimony pendente lite.  Appellant filed a claim for alimony pendente lite during the divorce, and claimed that the Supreme Court’s denial of this claim was in error because it required disclosure of statutory rights only when the provisions made for the spouse were unreasonable.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Absent fraud, duress, or misrepresentation, spouses should be bound by the terms of prenuptial agreements.

Facts
Appellant, Catherine Walsh Simeone, and appellee, Fredrick Simeone were married in 1975.  At the time of the marriage appellee was a thirty-nine year old neurosurgeon with an approximate income of $90,000 a year.  Appellant was a twenty-three year old unemployed nurse.  On the eve of the wedding, appellee’s attorney presented appellant with a prenuptial agreement.  Appellant signed the agreement without the assistance of counsel, and without any advice regarding the rights the agreement surrendered.  The agreement limited appellant to support payments of $200 per week, with a maximum total payment of $25,000.  The parties separated and appellee made payments satisfying the $25,000 limit.  During divorce proceedings appellant filed a claim for alimony during the litigation.  The Supreme Court affirmed a denial of her claim, finding that precedent permitted a prenuptial agreement if it either made a reasonable provision for the spouse or was entered into after full and fair disc

Issue
Should prior precedent be followed allowing consideration of the knowledge of the contracting parties and the reasonableness of their bargain in determining whether to uphold a prenuptial agreement?

Held
Such precedent is based on paternalistic assumptions that spouses are of unequal status and should not be enforced as it results in substantial deviation from traditional contract law.

Dissent
Marriage is not a contract for hire, a spouse should be able to avoid a prenuptial agreement if clear and convincing proof demonstrates that the agreement is too inequitable and unfair to be enforced.

Discussion
The majority’s decision is follows traditional contract law in that it supports the parties’ freedom to enter contracts by not examining the benefits accrued to the parties under the agreement.

