Citation
434 U.S. 374,98 S. Ct. 673,54 L. Ed. 2d 618,1978 U.S.

Brief Fact Summary
A Wisconsin Statute forced individuals to receive court permission in order to marry if they have a minor issue not in their custody which they are obligated to pay support for.  Appellant was unable to receive court permission under the statute and brought suit on behalf of all residents similarly situated.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
If a statute significantly interferes with the exercise of a fundamental constitutional right, it must be supported by sufficiently important state interests and closely tailored to effectuate only those interests.  Such interests are subject to strict scrutiny or “critical examination.”

Facts
Appellee Redhail was unable to enter into a lawful marriage under a Wisconsin statute that did not permit a resident to marry without court permission if he has a minor issue not in his custody which he is obligated to pay support by court order.  The statute allowed court permission only if the marriage applicant submits proof of compliance with the support obligation and additionally demonstrates that the children covered by the support order are not then or likely thereafter to become public charges.  In 1972 when appellee was a minor high school student he was found to be the father of a baby girl born out of wedlock and ordered to pay monthly support.  Appellee was unemployed and indigent until 1974, and unable to make payments.

Issue
Is a Wisconsin statute that provides that members of a certain class of residents cannot marry, within the State or elsewhere, without first obtaining a court order granting permission to marry constitutional?

Held
The statute is unconstitutional because it significantly interferes with the exercise of a fundamental right and is not supported by sufficiently important state interests and is not closely tailored to effectuate only those interests.

Concurrence
Justice Stewart.  The majority’s reliance on the Equal Protection Clause is misplaced because it is intended to deal only with invidiously discriminatory classifications.  The Due Process Clause protects the liberty right to marriage, and protection of the State’s interests must fall short of not permitting poor people to marry. Justice Stevens.  The Wisconsin Legislature incorrectly assumed that (a) only fathers would be affected by the legislation and (b) they would never marry employed women.  The Statute cannot withstand scrutiny under the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.

Discussion
The majority finds the statute to violate constitutional protections under both the Due Process and Equal Protection Clauses.  The Concurrences appear to differ mainly on which of these two clauses is more applicable.

