Citation
112 Wis. 2d 271, 332 N.W.2d 804 (1983)

Brief Fact Summary
The Court of Appeals (Wisconsin) found the Appellants, Kenwood Gauerke and Elisabeth Gauerke (the Gauerkes), realty companies, a real estate agent, and an insurer (Appellants), liable on a theory of strict responsibility for the misrepresentations of the Appellant real estate agent regarding the acreage and the amount of road and river frontage of resort property purchased by the Respondent purchasers, Robert W. Rozga and Ann C. Rozga (Respondents). The Appellants challenged the decision.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A cause of action for misrepresentation can be based on intent, negligence, or strict responsibility. The bases of responsibility in these three classifications of torts have at least three elements in common: (1) The representation must be of a fact and made by the defendant; (2) the representation of fact must be untrue and (3) the plaintiff must believe such representation to be true and rely thereon to his damage.

Facts
Through a local realtor, the Gauerkes purchased a hotel property owned by the Respondents and listed for sale by a second realtor. It was later discovered that the acreage was less than they had been told. The Respondents brought an action against the Appellants arguing strict responsibility for the misrepresentations regarding the acreage. One realtor settled and a jury found in the Gauerkes’ favor and awarded damages, having found the other realtor liable on the theory of strict responsibility. That realtor appealed, contending that strict responsibility did not apply.

Issue
Should the theory of strict responsibility have applied in the case and an instruction to that effect been submitted to the jury?

Held
Yes. The court affirmed the finding in favor of the Respondents against the realty Appellants in the Respondents’ action for misrepresentation.

Discussion
The tort of fraudulent misrepresentation or deceit provides for recovery for pure economic loss, unassociated with other injury. While the Wisconsin court applies a three-point scheme, most jurisdictions apply the formula outlined in the Restatement, which consists of five elements: (1) a material misrepresentation; (2) the defendant acted with the requisite scienter: she knew the statement was false or made it with reckless disregard as to its truth or falsity; (3) the defendant intended to induce reliance; (4) the misrepresentation caused plaintiff’s justifiable reliance; (5) pecuniary damages resulted to the plaintiff. The formula applied in Gauerke is, in any event, an abbreviated version of the former. As the court further explained (and as noted above), “A cause of action for misrepresentation can be based on intent, negligence, or strict responsibility. The bases of responsibility in these three classifications of torts have at least three elements in common: (1) T

