Citation
22 Ill.433 U.S. 25, 97 S. Ct. 2490, 53 L. Ed. 2d 557 (1977)

Brief Fact Summary
Plaintiffs sued Defendant County for injuries arising out of an airplane accident. The only meritorious count in Plaintiffs’ complaint alleged that Defendant breached its contract with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and Plaintiffs were third party beneficiaries of that contract. Defendant moved to dismiss, arguing that federal law applied, which did not give standing to Plaintiffs as third party beneficiaries from the contract between Defendant and FAA.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Federal common law does not apply in diversity cases unless the United States’ rights and obligations would be substantially affected by the outcome of the case. A decision that may remotely or upon speculation, affect the United States’ interests is not a strong enough reason to warrant application of federal common law.

Facts
Miree and others, Plaintiffs, sued DeKalb County, Defendant in federal court based on diversity of citizenship, for injuries and wrongful death arising from an airline accident that occurred shortly after takeoff from an airport owned by Defendant. The only meritorious count of the complaint alleged that Defendant breached its contract with FAA, which required Defendant to restrict use of the land adjacent to the airport to activities compatible with airport activities (i.e., takeoff and landing). The complaint further alleged that Defendant maintained a garbage dump next to the airport that attracted birds. The birds were sucked into the plane in question’s engine, which caused the crash. Plaintiffs further allege that they are third party beneficiaries of the contract and thus have standing to sue on the contract.

Issue
Does the United States have such a strong interest in this case such that federal common law, as opposed to state law, should apply to the issue of whether Plaintiffs have standing to sue?

Held
No. Reversed and remanded.

Discussion
The opinion shows that the rule articulated in Clearfield Trust Co., infra, requires a determination of the rights and obligations of the United States, not other parties affected. In addition, even though federal law specifically states that a contract does not allow for a federal cause of action, this does not foreclose the possibility of a state cause of action pursuant to the federal law. This is why standing was analyzed under state law, to determine if Georgia law would allow such a cause of action.

