Citation
403 U.S. 713, 91 S. Ct. 2140, 29 L. Ed. 2d 822, 1971 U.S.

Brief Fact Summary
The Supreme Court of the United States (Supreme Court) held that the Government failed to meet the requisite burden of proof needed to justify a prior restraint of expression when attempting to enjoin the New York Times and Washington Post from publishing contents of a classified study.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Any system of prior restraints on expression comes to the Supreme Court bearing a heavy presumption against its invalidity. The Government “thus creates a heavy burden of showing justification for the enforcement of such a restraint.”

Facts
The United States sought to enjoin the New York Times and Washington Post from publishing contents of a confidential study about the Government’s decision making with regards to Vietnam policy. The District Court in the New York Times case and the District Court and the Court of Appeals in the Washington Post case held that the Government had not met the requisite burden justifying such a prior restraint.

Issue
Whether the United States met the heavy burden of showing justification for the enforcement of such a restraint on the New York Times and Washington Post to enjoin them from publishing contents of a classified study?

Held
No. Judgments of the lower courts affirmed. The order of the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit is reversed and remanded with directions to enter a judgment affirming the District Court. The stays entered June 25, 1971, by the Court are vacated. The mandates shall issue forthwith.

Dissent
The scope of the judicial function in passing upon activities of the Executive Branch in the field of foreign affairs is very narrowly restricted. This view is dictated by the doctrine of Separation of Powers. The doctrine prohibiting prior restraints does not prevent the courts from maintaining status quo long enough to act responsibly.

Discussion
This very divided opinion shows how heavy the Government’s burden is to justify a prior restraint of expressi

