Citation
444 U.S. 984 100 S. Ct. 490 62 L. Ed. 2d 412 1979 U.S.

Brief Fact Summary
The Defendants were Gwen Mitchell (Ms. Mitchell) and Doubleday Publishing (Defendants). Ms. Mitchell wrote a novel allegedly based on the Plaintiff, Dr. Paul Bindrim’s (Plaintiff), psychological techniques, including a nude marathon. Plaintiff brought an action for libel. Defendants claimed the novel was a work of fiction and the character could not reasonably be identified as Plaintiff.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The issue of whether or not a character is a representation of the Plaintiff in question is if a reader with knowledge of the surrounding circumstances could reasonably understand that the words referred to the plaintiff.

Facts
The Plaintiff, a licensed psychologist, used a “nude marathon group therapy” technique to help rid individuals of their psychological inhibitions. Ms. Mitchell, a successful novelist, registered in this program, signing a contract with Plaintiff to not disclose what occurred at the workshop. Ms. Mitchell contracted with Doubleday for a novel based on the nude-therapy technique. Plaintiff brought a libel action against the Defendants, claiming he was defamed by the depiction. The jury found for Plaintiff at trial and the court granted a motion for a new trial conditioned on Plaintiff accepting a remittitur. Both Plaintiff and Defendants appealed.

Issue
Was there sufficient evidence to show that the Plaintiff was identified as the main character in the novel?

Held
Yes. Judgment affirmed.

Dissent
Presiding Judge Files wrote that the fictional therapist in Ms. Mitchell’s book is conspicuously different from the Plaintiff. The only similarity is the nude encounter therapy. Only three witnesses testified they recognized Plaintiff and the only characteristic they recognized was the therapy practiced.

Discussion
The reference to the plaintiff, known as the colloquium, need not address the plaintiff by name if it is reasonably understood as referring to him.

