Citation
226 Fed. Appx. 264.

Brief Fact Summary
The Plaintiff, Kennedy (Plaintiff), accused the Defendant, Cannon’s (Defendant), client of rape. The Defendant made a statement to the local paper in defense of his client. The Plaintiff sued the Defendant for defamation.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
An absolute immunity extends to the judge as well as to witnesses and parties to the litigation, for defamatory statements uttered in the course of a trial or contained in pleadings, affidavits, depositions, and other documents directly related to the case.

Facts
The Defendant was a lawyer for Charles Humphrey (Humphrey), an African-American man who was accused of raping a white woman. Humphrey claimed that the woman had consented to the intercourse. The Defendant spoke to the editor of the local paper and gave his client’s side of the story. The prosecution had already published its side of the events. The Defendant’s side of the story was printed in an article. As a result of the article, the Plaintiff suffered humiliation and harassment. She was eventually forced to move out of the state. The Plaintiff sued the Defendant claiming that the article charged her with adultery and was slanderous per se. The Defendant admitted to the court that the article had correctly quoted his statements. The Defendant claimed he needed to make the statements to tell his client’s side of the story in order to prevent a lynching of his client. At the conclusion of his testimony, the trial court granted the Defendant’s motion for a directed verdict. The

Issue
Were the Defendant’s statements to the local paper privileged?

Held
No. Reversed and remanded on the question of mitigation of damages.

Discussion
This holding provides the rule for an absolute privilege. In this case, the Defendant did not have an absolute privilege because his statement was outside of the privilege. Had he spoken the words in court, he would not be liable for defamation. An absolute privilege is required at trial, because, in realty, the system expects witnesses and parties to be defamed.

