Citation
475 U.S. 1134 106 S. Ct. 1784 90 L. Ed. 2d 330 1986 U.S.

Brief Fact Summary
The Defendant, Philadelphia Newspapers (Philadelphia), published five stories that claimed the Plaintiff, Hepps (Plaintiff), was connected to organized crime. The Plaintiff sued the Defendant for defamation.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A private figure suing for defamation about a matter of public concern has the burden of showing falsity, as well as fault before damages may be recovered.

Facts
The Defendants published five stories about the Plaintiff and the corporation of which he was principal stockholder. The stories claimed that they had links to organized crime and had used those connections to influence the State’s governmental processes, both legislative and administrative. The trial judge held that the Plaintiff bore the burden of proving falsity, as distinguished from fault. The Pennsylvania Supreme Court viewed Gertz as simply requiring the Plaintiff to show fault in actions for defamation. It concluded that a showing of fault did not require a showing of falsity.

Issue
Does the Plaintiff, a private figure, suing for defamation about a matter of public concern have the burden of showing falsity, as well as fault before damages may be recovered?

Held
Yes. Reversed and remanded.

Dissent
Justice John Paul Stevens (J. Stevens) argues that unless a plaintiff can overcome the burden imposed by Gertz, he cannot recover regardless of how the burden of proof on the issue of truth or falsity is allocated. By definition, therefore, the lonely litigants – and the only publishers – who will benefit from today’s decision are those who act negligently or maliciously.

Discussion
In this case, the claims made by the Defendant that the Plaintiff was connected to organized crime were difficult to prove or disprove and thus the outcome of the case was determined based on who bore the burden of proof. The Supreme Court decided to impose the burden of proof on the Plaintiff. The Plaintiff must have shown that the claims made by the Defendant were false in order to recover for defamation. The Supreme Court imposed the burden on the Plaintiff because the United States Constitution (Constitution) requires that injurious, but unknowably true or false speech give way to free sp

