Citation
22 Ill.517 U.S. 484, 116 S. Ct. 1495, 134 L. Ed. 2d 711, 24 Med. L. Rptr. 1673 (1996)

Brief Fact Summary
The Petitioners, 44 Liquormart, Inc. and Peoples Super Liquor Stores, Inc. (Petitioners) in 1991 placed an ad in a Rhode Island newspaper advertising low prices on its non-alcoholic products. In this same advertisement, it showed pictures of alcoholic beverages, and the word “WOW” next to them. The Rhode Island Liquor Control Administrator (Administrator) found this violated the Rhode Island prohibition on alcoholic beverage prices in advertisements within the state, causing the Petitioners to file suit in Federal District Court seeking a judgment declaring the statute unconstitutional.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
When a State entirely prohibits the dissemination of truthful, non-misleading commercial messages for reasons unrelated to the preservation of a fair bargaining process, there is far less reason to depart from the rigorous review that the First Amendment of the United State Constitution (Constitution) generally demands.

Facts
Competitors of the Petitioner filed a complaint to the State of Rhode Island concerning the Petitioner’s 1991 advertisement in a Rhode Island newspaper. This advertisement did not state the price of any alcoholic beverages and in fact mentioned that State law prohibits the use of alcoholic beverage prices in advertising. The advertisement did state the low prices of peanuts, potato chips and mixers offered at the store, identified various brands of liquor sold in the store and included the word “WOW” in large letters next to the vodka and rum bottles in the ad. The competitors complained that the implied reference to bargain prices for liquor violated the statutory ban on price advertising. The Administrator investigated, and assessed a $400 fine. After paying the fine, the Petitioner filed this action in Federal District Court seeking a declaratory judgment that the two statutes restricting alcohol advertising and implementing regulations violate the First Amendment of the Co

Issue
Is Rhode Island’s complete ban on price advertising of alcoholic beverages justified?

Held
No, Rhode Island’s ban on price advertising is in violation of the First and Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution. There is no question that the regulation in this case involves a blanket prohibition against truthful, nonmisleading speech about a lawful product. There is also no question that the ban serves an end unrelated to consumer protection. Therefore this regulation does not undergo a purely Central Hudson analysis. The Supreme Court informs governmental entities to be mindful that prohibitions of this type rarely survive constitutional review. This type of analysis is to be made with “special care.” In fact the Supreme Court declares that when a State entirely prohibits the dissemination of truthful, nomisleading commercial messages for reasons unrelated to the preservation of a fair bargaining process, there is far less reason to depart from the rigorous review that the First Amendment of the Constitution generally demands. It is important to note that the mere fac

Discussion
This case establishes yet another test for determining whether commercial speech is valid, although the analysis made in this case is very similar to the Central Hudson analysis. This case establishes a heavy governmental burden for showing that a blanket ban is necessary to promote the State’s interests. This test contains a less stringent burden than the test used for ordinary speech, but the state has a heavier burden with a blanket ban such as is at issue in this case than it does with regular commercial speech as postulated in Central Hudson. The concurrences in this case debate the method used to determine the constitutionality of this regulation and provide potential uncertainty in future cases as to what methodology will be used and will likely depend on the jurisprudence of the combined Justices during a case.

