Citation
478 N.W.2d 790,1991 Minn. App.

Brief Fact Summary
Appellant petitioned to be appointed guardian of her lesbian partner after her partner was involved in a serious accident.  The court denied appellant’s petition and instead attempted to appoint what it considered to be a neutral guardian.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The appointment of a guardian should be based on the best interests of the ward, taking into consideration the ward’s expressed preference and the petitioner’s qualifications.

Facts
Sharon Kowalski suffered severe brain injuries as a result of an automobile accident.  At the time of the accident, she was living in St. Cloud with her lesbian partner, appellant Karen Thompson.  They had exchanged rings, named each other as insurance beneficiaries, and had been living together as a couple for four years.  Her parents were unaware of the lesbian relationship.  Appellant and Sharon’s father, Donald Kowalski, cross-petitioned for guardianship.  Appellant agreed to the appointment of Kowalski as guardian, expecting that she would have certain visitation rights and input into medical decisions.  The guardianship order gave complete control of visitation to Kowalski, who received court approval to terminate appellant’s visitation rights and relocated Sharon to a nursing home in his town.  Upon order from Judge Robert Campbell specialists examined Sharon and determined that she could express her wishes on visitation.  They concluded that Thompson wished to see appe

Issue
Was the court correct in appointing Tomberlin as guardian based upon the comparative qualifications of appellant and Tomberlin?

Held
The trial court abused its discretion in denying appellant’s petition and naming Thompson guardian instead.

Discussion
The trial court denied appellant’s request to be appointed guardian despite evidence that she was best suited for this position.  The trial court appointed Tomberlin in an effort to reconcile arguments from Sharon’s family; however the standard for appointment is the best interests for the ward, not the family.

