Citation
18 Cal. 3d 660,557 P.2d 106,134 Cal. Rptr. 815,1976 Cal.

Brief Fact Summary
Plaintiff and defendant lived in a nonmarital relationship, with an oral agreement to share equally all property accumulated.  Upon dissolution of their relationship, plaintiff brought suit to enforce the oral agreement.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The California court found that partners in nonmarital relationships may bring claims for property division based on both express and implied contracts.

Facts
Plaintiff and defendant lived together for seven years without marrying, with all property acquired during this time taken in defendant’s name.  Plaintiff avers that she and defendant entered into an oral agreement where the parties would combine their efforts and earnings and share equally all property accumulated as a result of their efforts.  Plaintiff agreed to give up a lucrative career as a singer and entertainer and assume the role of homemaker, with defendant agreeing to provide for all of plaintiff’s financial support.  Defendant compelled plaintiff to leave his household in May of 1970, and continued to provide support to her until November of 1971.  Thereafter, he refused to provide further support.  Plaintiff brought suit to enforce the oral agreement, claiming that she was entitled to half the property and to support payments.  The trial court granted judgment on the pleadings for the defendant.

Issue
Did the trial court err in granting defendant judgment on the pleadings?

Held
The trial court erred in granting defendant judgment on the pleadings because the plaintiff’s complaint states a cause of action for breach of an express contract, and can be amended to state a cause of action independent of allegations of express contract.

Discussion
The Court examined how the distribution of property acquired in a non-marital relationship should be governed.  The court allowed not only plaintiff’s claim that an express contract existed and should be enforced, but also found that implied contracts may be found in such situations.

