Citation
504 U.S. 905; 112 S. Ct. 1931;118 L. Ed. 2d 538; 1992 U.S.<

Brief Fact Summary
Carole had an adulterous affair with Michael while married to Gerald.  A child was born while Carole and Gerald were together, but was likely Michael’s child.  Michael and the child by guardian ad litem brought suit to establish paternity and a right to visitation.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
An adulterous, natural father does not have a constitutional right to paternity over the marital father.

Facts
In 1976 Carole D. and Gerald D. were married and established a home in California.  In 1978, Carole became involved in an adulterous affair with Michael H.  She conceived a child, Victoria, in 1980, with Gerald listed as father on the birth certificate.  Gerald has always held the child out to be his daughter, but soon after delivery Carole informed Michael she believed he might be the father.  In 1981 Gerald moved to New York and Carole, Michael, and Victoria had blood tests revealing a 98.07% probability that Michael was the father.  Carole visited with Michael for several months, were he held Victoria out as his daughter.  Carole left Michael and took up residence in California with another man.  In the summer of 1982 Carole and Victoria visited Gerald in New York, and the three vacationed in Europe.  In the fall she returned to California.  In November of 1982 Michael filed a filiation action in California to establish his paternity and right to visitation.  In 1983 the co

Issue
Does the presumption established by the law infringe upon the due process rights of a man who wishes to establish his paternity of a child born to the wife of another man or infringe upon the constitutional right of the child to maintain a relationship with her natural father?

Held
[ Please provide a description of the decision(s) of this case ]

Dissent
If we had looked to tradition with such specificity in past cases, many decisions would have had a different result.  The plurality ignores the developing society in which we live.  Liberty must include the freedom not to conform.  This is not a new interest, in that of a parent and a child in their relationship with one another.  The plurality’s decision is striking considering the precedent preventing States from denying important interests to those in situations that do not fit the government’s narrow view of the family.

Discussion
The dissent accuses the plurality of being too specific in its search of history to support the right claimed by appellant.  An omitted concurring opinion agreed in the sense that it objected that the plurality’s historical analysis might foreclose the identification of future liberty interests.

