Citation
431 U.S. 494,97 S. Ct. 1932,52 L. Ed. 2d 531,1977 U.S.

Brief Fact Summary
A Cleveland statute made it a crime for a dwelling to contain members of more than one family, and limited the definition of family to a basic nuclear family.  Appellant was convicted under the statute when her son, grandson, and a grandson from another child all lived with her.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The right to live as a family unit is protected under the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.

Facts
Appellant, Mrs. Inez Moore, lived in an East Cleveland home with her son, her son and her two grandsons.  The two grandsons were first cousins rather than brothers, with one of the grandsons moving in with his appellant after his mother’s death.  Appellant received notice that she was in violation of a Cleveland criminal statute that limits occupants of a dwelling to members of a single family.  Appellant’s family did not meet the definition required for a single family, and she was convicted and sentenced to 5 days in jail and a $25 fine.

Issue
Does the Cleveland statute violate the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment?

Held
The right infringed upon is a liberty interest protected by the Due Process Clause, and the statute does not sufficiently advance legitimate state interests.  Therefore, the statute is unconstitutional.

Dissent
Justice Stewart, Justice Rehnquist.  Appellant contends that she has a constitutional right to share her residence with whomever she pleases, but precedent in Belle Terre says otherwise.  Although appellant’s desire to share her dwelling with her extended family involves private family life, the desire cannot be equated with interests previously found to be constitutionally protected.  Appellant also cannot claim constitutional rights on equal protection grounds because the city’s definition does not offend the Constitution.  The pluralities’ decision extends the limited substantive contours of the Due Process Clause beyond recognition.

Concurrence
Justice Brennan, Justice Marshall.  This concurrence is separately written to underscore the fact that such family units are important to immigrant, minority, and disenfranchised families as a means of survival.

Discussion
This case demonstrates different opinions between the plurality and the dissent on how far to extend the rights protected by substantive due process.

