Citation
114 F.3d 1097,1997 U.S. App.70 Empl. Prac. Dec. (CCH) P44,739; 12 I.E.R. Cas. (BNA) 1582

Brief Fact Summary
Appellant brought suit against the Attorney General after a job offer was withdrawn when the Attorney General discovered that appellant intended to enter into a same-sex marriage.  Same sex marriages are not recognized under Georgia law.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The Court found that the appropriate test for evaluating the constitutional implications of a government employer’s decision to withdraw a job offer based on the potential employee’s “marriage” is a balancing test rather than strict scrutiny.

Facts
Appellant Robin Shahar was offered a position of Staff Attorney with the Attorney General of the State of Georgia after her pending graduation from law school.  She began making plans for a “wedding” for her and her same-sex partner, described as a Jewish, lesbian feminist, out-door wedding.  On a required application for the Staff Attorney position, appellant indicated that she was engaged, and referenced Francine Greenfield as her future spouse’s name.  While working on her wedding invitations with her partner at a restaurant, appellant met a staff attorney for the Attorney General’s office and mentioned the wedding preparations to them.  This staff attorney mentioned to an Assistant Attorney General that appellant was marrying another woman.  Senior aids to the Attorney General became concerned with potential problems in the office resulting from employment of appellant.  The Attorney General, upon the advice of his senior lawyers, decided to withdraw appellant’s job offer.

Issue
Did the Attorney General of the State of Georgia violate appellant’s federal constitutional rights by revoking an employment offer because of her purported marriage to another woman?

Held
The appellant’s federal rights were not violated because the State of Georgia’s interest as an employer in promoting the efficiency of the Law Department’s important public service outweighs appellant’s personal associational interests.

Discussion
The Court stressed the fact that the powers of the government as an employer are far broader, particularly in a case such as this where the employment involves access to the employer’s confidence, acting as the employer’s spokesperson, and helping to make policy.

