Citation
416 U.S. 1,94 S. Ct. 1536,39 L. Ed. 2d 797,1974 U.S.

Brief Fact Summary
Appellees brought suit challenging the constitutionality of a law that restricted lad use to one-family dwellings.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The restrictive land ordinance did not impinge on any fundamental constitutional interests and was rationally related to a permissible state objective.

Facts
Belle Torre restricted land use to one-family dwellings excluding lodging houses, boarding houses, fraternity houses, or multiple-dwelling houses.  Appellees, the Dickmans owed a house leased to six unrelated students attending a nearby state school.  When the village served the Dickmans with an “Order to Remedy Violations” of the ordinance, the owners plus three tenants thereupon brought this action under 42 U.S.C Section:1983 for an injunction and a judgment declaring the ordinance unconstitutional.

Issue
Is the restricted land use statute unconstitutional?

Held
The majority held that the statute did not violate the Equal Protection Clause.

Dissent
The legislation unnecessarily burdens appellees’ First Amendment freedom of association and their constitutionally guaranteed right to privacy.  Constitutional protection is extended, not only to modes of association that are political in the usual sense, but also to those that pertain to the social and economic benefit of members.  The freedom of association is often entwined with the right of privacy.  The instant ordinance discriminates on the personal lifestyle choice of household companions.  It limits the density of occupancy of only those homes occupied by unrelated persons.  It impinges on fundamental personal rights, and can withstand constitutional scrutiny only upon a clear showing that the burden imposed is necessary to protect a compelling and substantial governmental interest that no less intrusive means will adequately protect.  The interests protected are legitimate and substantial, but the means chosen are both under and overinclusive.

Discussion
The majority found that no fundamental liberty interests were in question, and that the legislation bore a rational relationship to a legitimate state objective.  The dissent argued that the freedom of association and privacy were brought into question, and that the legislature was constitutionally overinclusive and underinclusive.

