Citation
22 Ill.196 F.R.D. 254 (M.D. Pa. 2000)

Brief Fact Summary
The Plaintiff, Krista (Plaintiff), sought production of preliminary reports and other documents created by the Defendant, Equitable Life Assurance Society’s (Defendant), expert witnesses in connection to Plaintiff’s insurance disability claim denial lawsuit.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Preliminary reports and opinions made by expert witnesses who are expected to testify at trial are not protected under the work product doctrine and are therefore discoverable. Communications made by litigant’s counsel to their expert witnesses with regard to matters that are protected by the work product doctrine are not discoverable.

Facts
Defendant denied Plaintiff’s claim of disability benefits under an insurance policy. Plaintiff brought suit and requested the Court to order Defendant to turn over documents generated by or provided to Defendant’s expert witnesses pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure (FRCP) Rule 26(b)(4). Defendant claimed the documents were protected work product and at an oral hearing the trial judge ordered an in camera inspection of the documents. The documents were mostly draft reports from three expert witnesses: (i) Davison, an attorney; (ii) Geisser, a forensic accountant and (iii) Blum, a doctor. Defendant claimed all of Davison’s documents to be work product. Defendant only claimed the work product privilege on some of Geisser’s documents and asserted the rest were transmittal letters, outside the scope of discovery permitted by FRCP Rule 26(a)(2)(B). Defendant claimed that 18 documents withheld from Dr. Blum’s production were also transmittal letters outside the scope of deli

Issue
Whether draft reports prepared by an expert witness designated to testify at trial are covered by the work product doctrine.

Held
Defendant will be required to produce all documents it has withheld with the exception of two documents that contain core work product.

Discussion
Defendant claimed that the work product protection extended not only to documents prepared in anticipation of trial by a party’s attorney, but also to a party’s consultant or agent. The Defendant insisted that the draft reports were protected work product material under FRCP Rule 26(b)(3). However, the Court noted that Defendant disregarded FRCP Rule 26(b)(4), which authorized the depositions of any person who had been identified as experts and whose opinions may be presented at trial. Further, Defendant asserted that Defendant’s counsel did not write any portion of the final report or make specific suggestions with respect to the content of the report and did not request that the report be prepared in such a way to bring about a predetermined outcome. From this, the Court reasoned that since Defendant’s counsel’s mental processes and opinions were not contained in the experts’ draft reports, the request of production of these documents would not invade the privacy to be

