Citation
316 F.3d 450 (4th Cir. 2003) U.S.

Brief Fact Summary
American citizen captured in Afghanistan was held as an enemy combatant.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
“Because it is undisputed that Hamdi was capture in a zone of active combat in a foreign theater of conflict, the submitted declaration is a sufficient basis upon which to conclude that the Commander in Chief has constitutionally detained Hamdi pursuant to the war powers entrusted to him by the United States Constitution.”

Facts
Petitioner Hamdi was captured in Afghanistan shortly after 9/11.  Hamdi is an American citizen, and was classified as an “enemy combatant.”  After a period of petitions, motions, and counter-motions, Hamdi filed for a writ of habeas corpus.  The Special Advisor to the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, Michael Mobbs, issued a response, outlining the Government’s position.  The district court found the “Mobbs declaration” insufficient in supporting the Government’s case.

Issue
“[W]hether a declaration by a Special Advisor to the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy setting forth what the government contends were the circumstances of Hamdi’s capture was sufficient by itself to justify his detention.”

Held
Yes.  First, the Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit acknowledged that the Constitution creates “war powers” that invest “the President, as Commander in Chief, with the power to wage war which Congress has declared, and to carry into effect all laws passed by Congress for the conducts of war…” The Court also noted that since Article III of the Constitution does not have any sort of war powers analog, “the Supreme Court has shown great deference to the political branches” in war matters. However, the Court noted that this deference is “not unlimited,” and that habeas corpus is still valid. The Court found that is must approach this case by balancing the tension of individual rights and national security interests.

Discussion
“Cases such as Hamdi’s raise serious questions which the courts will continue to treat as such. The nation has fought since its founding for the liberty without which security rings hollow and for security without which liberty cannot thrive. The judiciary was meant to respect the delicacy of the balance.”

