Citation
539 U.S. 510, 123 S. Ct. 2527, 156 L. Ed. 2d 471 (2003)

Brief Fact Summary
Defendant on trial for murder argued that his attorney failed by not examining his background and other mitigating evidence of his life.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
“In assessing [a] counsel’s investigation, [the court] must conduct an objective review of their performance, measured for ‘reasonableness under prevailing professional norms’ which includes a context-dependent consideration of the challenged conduct as seen ‘from counsel’s perspective at the time.’”

Facts
Petitioner Wiggins was tried and convicted for the murder of an elderly woman.  He was represented by two attorneys, Nethercott and Schlaich.  He elected to be tried before a judge, and was convicted.  He elected to be sentenced by a jury, and received a death sentence.  Nethercott first stated that the jury would hear evidence that someone other than the petitioner was guilty.  She also stated that petitioner “has had a difficult life.”  However, the counsel presented no evidence to demonstrate that fact.  Defendant was sentenced to death.  In his appeal, the petitioner challenged the adequacy of his initial counsel, arguing that the counsel had failed to investigate his dysfunctional background.  The petitioner brought forth testimony from a social worker detailing the petitioner’s childhood of abuse.  Schlaich testified that he did not remember retaining a social worker, instead opting for a strategy of “retry[ing] the factual case.”  The trial court held that when the deci

Issue
Whether an “attorney’s failure to investigate [a defendant's] background and present mitigating evidence of his unfortunate life history at his capital sentencing proceedings violated his Sixth Amendment right to counsel.”

Held
Yes.  Applying a test of reasonableness to the counsels’ decision, the Supreme Court first found that the investigation “drew from three sources:” a psychologist; a written PSI, including a “one-page account of Wiggins’ personal history,” and; records from the Baltimore City Department of Social Services (DSS).  Counsel’s decision not to expand “their investigation beyond the

