Citation
N.M. Ct App., 148 N.M. 172, 231 P.3d 628 (2010)

Brief Fact Summary
the contention of the Beavers (P) who had orally agreed to sell land to the Brumlows (D) reneged on the agreement on the ground that the statute of fraud prevented specific performance of the agreement because the part performance of the Brumlows (D) was not “unequivocally referable” to the verbal agreement, of which the verbal agreement was not certain as to the purchase price and time of performance.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
the statute of fraud does not bar the specific performance of an oral contract for the sale of land, where the terms of contract other than the purchase price have been proved, part performance to the agreement by both parties have occurred, the part performance refers unequivocally to the sale of the land through possession and the making of improvements and a remedy of law would not be adequate.

Facts
At the time Mr. Brumlows (D) was working with the Beavers (P), an agreement was reached between both parties in which the Beavers (P) verbally agreed to sell property to Brumlows (D) on which he was to site a house. The Brumlows (D) later withdrew all their retirement plans, bought and installed a mobile home on the property and then added permanent improvements to it because they trusted the Beavers (P) promise and had taken this step after they had received the blessings of the Beavers (P). A total amount of $85,000 was utilized to buy the house and to make improvements. The necessary permits and application which the Brumlows (D) needed were also facilitated with the help of the Beavers (P).

Issue
Does statute of fraud bar the specific performance of an oral contract for the sale of land, where the terms of contract other than the purchase price have been proved and part performance to the agreement by both parties have occurred, where part performance refers unequivocally to the sale of the land through possession and the making of improvements and a remedy of law would not be adequate?

Held
(Vigil, J.) No. the statute of fraud does not bar the specific performance of an oral contract for the sale of land, where the terms of contract other than the purchase price have been proved, part performance to the agreement by both parties have occurred, the part performance refers unequivocally to the sale of the land through possession and the making of improvements and a remedy of law would not be adequate. Actions on contracts for the sales of land or interests in land are generally barred by the statute of frauds where there has been no written agreement for the sale, authenticated by the party to be charged or the party’s proxy.

Discussion
two principal factors are looked for by majority of courts, as did the court in this case in deciding whether a promisee’s performance is “unequivocally referable” to the contract; (1) whether possession of the property has been obtained by the party seeking the enforcement, and (2) whether a valuable improvement have been made to the property by the party. The performance exception would be applied by most courts if these two principal factors were available. Majority of these courts do not attach more importance to the payment of money. The “unequivocally referable” standard is not used by the Restatement (Second) of Contracts but instead, attention is given to the likelihood of party seeking enforcement, in reliance on the contract, so changed his position that only specific performance can avoid injustice.

