Citation
450 U.S. 662, 101 S. Ct. 1309, 67 L. Ed. 2d 580, 1981 U.S. 17.

Brief Fact Summary
Iowa prohibits the use of 65 foot doubles (a certain type of truck) within its borders, but makes certain exceptions for the same trucks used for the benefit of Iowa residents.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
State regulations designed to promote public health or safety, but further such purposes only marginally and interfere with commerce substantially may be invalid under the Commerce Clause.

Facts
Iowa, unlike all other States nearby it, prohibits the use of 65-foot doubles within its borders. Notwithstanding this restriction, Iowa allows its border cities to adopt the truck length limitations of the states adjoining them. Iowa also allows Iowa truck manufacturers to obtain a permit to ship trucks out of the state as long as 70 feet long. Mobile homes are also eligible for exemptions, as long as they are being used to benefit Iowa residents. Dissatisfied, the Plaintiff, Consolidated Freightways Corp. (Plaintiff), filed suit in the District Court arguing the Iowa’s scheme unconstitutionally burdened interstate commerce. Iowa claimed that it enacted its scheme lawfully for the purpose of promoting local safety.

Issue
Was Iowa’s statute scheme an unreasonable safety measure enacted pursuant to its police powers?

Held
Yes. The judgment of the Court of Appeals is affirmed.

Dissent
Justice William Rehnquist (J. Rehnquist) states that where a state enacts a statute for the purpose of promoting safety, the Court should not directly compare safety benefits to commerce burdens and strike the law if former weighs heavier. Instead the Court should engage in a “sensitive consideration” to determine if an asserted safety justification is merely a pretext for discriminating against interstate commerce.

Discussion
This case involves an apparently facially neutral statute with out-of-state effects that may exceed in-state benefits. As such, much emphasis is placed on the cost/benefit factors resulting from the regulation. Whether it is appropriate for the courts to fix the lawfulness of a statute on this type of retrospective review is debat

