Citation
529 U.S. 362, 120 S. Ct. 1495, 146 L. Ed. 2d 389 (2000)

Brief Fact Summary
Terry Williams (”Mr. Willliams”) was convicted of capital murder and received a death sentence for robbery and murder in Virginia in 1985.  On appeal, Mr. Williams claimed ineffective assistance of counsel because his attorney failed to introduce certain mitigating evidence during the sentencing portion of his trial.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A federal habeas writ may issue only when the state court decision was contrary to or involved an unreasonable application of clearly established Federal law as determined by the United States Supreme Court (”Supreme Court”).

Facts
Mr. Williams was sentenced to death for robbery and murder of Harris Stone (”Mr. Stone”) on November 3, 1985, in Danville, Virginia.  Mr. Williams killed Mr.Stone with a mattock and robbed him after Mr. Stone refused to lend him money.  Mr. Williams filed for state collateral relief in Danville Circuit Court arguing that his attorney was ineffective for failing to offer certain mitigating evidence at sentencing.  After an evidentiary hearing on the issue, the State Circuit court found his trial attorney ineffective at the sentencing phase.  The Virginia Supreme Court, while assuming the trial counsel was ineffective, disagreed with the trial judge’s conclusion that Mr. Williams suffered sufficient harm to warrant relief.  Williams sought a federal writ of habeas corpus pursuant to 28 U.S.C. Section:2245, and the federal trial judge granted relief.  The Federal Court of Appeals reversed the decision and sided with the Virginia Supreme Court.

Issue
Was Mr. Williams’ constitutional right to the effective assistance of counsel violated?

Held
The Supreme Court, with different majorities of Justices for each holding, held that Mr. Williams had been deprived of the constitutional right to the effective assistance of counsel.

Dissent
Chief Justice Rehnquist (”J. Rehnquist”) issued a concurring and dissenting opinion in which Justice Antonin Scalia (”J. Scalia”) and Justice Clarence Thomas (”J. Thomas”) joined.  J. Rehnquist disagreed with the decision to grant habeas relief arguing that the Virginia Supreme Court’s decision was not contrary to or an unreasonable application of Strickland.

Discussion
In concluding that Mr. Williams’ attorney was ineffective within the meaning of Strickland v. Washington, the Supreme Court noted that the lower court should have relied on Strickland in deciding the ineffective assistance claim.  Further, the lower court failed to fully evaluate and give appropriate consideration to the mitigating evidence..

