Citation
73 N.Y.2d 246, 538 N.Y.S.2d 937, 536 N.E.2d 372 (1989)

Brief Fact Summary
The Appellate Division of the Supreme Court in the First Judicial Department (New York) affirmed a trial court’s order awarding plaintiff damages against defendants, a doctor and an anesthesiologist, in a malpractice action alleging surgical error that lead to plaintiff’s brain damage and coma. The physician and the anesthesiologist appealed.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
An award of damages to a person injured by the negligence of another is to compensate the victim, not to punish the wrongdoer. The goal is to restore the injured party, to the extent possible, to the position that would have been occupied had the wrong not occurred.

Facts
Plaintiff, 31 year-old Emma McDougald, entered a New York hospital to undergo a Caesarian section and tubal ligation. In the course of the procedure she suffered oxygen deprivation, resulting in severe brain damage and leaving her in a permanent coma. McDougald and her husband brought an action claiming medical malpractice. A jury awarded multiple damages, including damages for “loss of pleasures and pursuits of life.” On appeal, the court modified the award and granted a new trial on nonpecuniary damages on the basis that the trial court had erred in its jury instructions.

Issue
Does an award of damages for loss of enjoyment to a person whose injuries preclude any awareness of the loss serve a compensatory purpose?

Held
No and No. The court modified the damages awards, with costs to defendants, by granting a new trial on the issue of nonpecuniary damages of Plaintiff Emma McDougald and, as modified, affirmed. With regard to the specific issues:

Dissent
In dissent, Judge Titone takes issue with the majority’s approach, stating “The majority’s holding represents a compromise position that neither comports with the fundamental principles of tort compensation nor furnishes a satisfactory, logically consistent framework for compensating nonpecuniary loss.” Specifically, Titone finds an award for loss of enjoyment of life appropriate to a nonpecuniary award analysis, stating: “I conclude that loss of enjoyment of life is an objective damage item, conceptually distinct from conscious pain and suffering, I can find no fault with the trial court’s instruction authorizing separate awards and permitting an award for ‘loss of enjoyment of life’ even in the absence of any awareness of that loss on the part of the injured plaintiff.”

Discussion
The consideration of pain and suffering in most cases is broad in scope, in that it will include the psychological distress that accompanies severe physical injuries, and the contemplation of a victim’s future inabilities. Pain and suffering, and other forms of mental distress have no obvious monetary equivalent.

