Citation
22 Ill.49 N.Y.2d 668, 427 N.Y.S.2d 769, 404 N.E.2d 1310 (1980)

Brief Fact Summary
The defendant, Victor Casassa, brutally murdered his victim after she rejected him and was charged with second-degree murder. The sole issue presented at trial was whether the defendant had acted under the influence of extreme emotional disturbance, thereby warranting a reduction of the charge from second degree murder to manslaughter.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The reasonableness of extreme emotional disturbance must be determined from the point of view of a reasonable person in the defendant’s situation under the circumstances as the defendant believed them to be.

Facts
The defendant, Victor Casassa, became obsessed with his victim, Victoria Lo Consolo, after she rejected him. On several occasions ha broke into her apartment and on the last visit, he brought the victim a gift, which she refused. Upon her refusal, the defendant stabbed the victim and submerged her in a bathtub to make sure that she was in fact dead. The defendant was charged with second-degree murder and did not contest the facts of the crime. The sole issue presented to the trial court was whether the defendant, at the time of the killing, had acted under the influence of “extreme emotional disturbance” thereby warranting a reduction from second degree murder to manslaughter.

Issue
Did the trial court err in failing to afford the defendant the benefit of the affirmative defense of extreme emotional disturbance? In a broader sense, do all mental infirmities constitute extreme emotional disturbance within the meaning of the statute?

Held
No. Judgment affirmed.

Discussion
The Model Penal code broadens the applicability of the common law provocation defense by abandoning the common law formula for provocation for a more flexible Extreme Emotional Defense Doctrine. The New York Court of Appeals held in this case that in determination of whether a “reasonable explanation” for a defendant’s extreme emotional disturbance exists should be subjective. That is, it should be based on the external circumstances as the defendant perceived them, regardless of whether the defendant’s perception is accurate.

