Citation
22 Ill.475 U.S. 1, 106 S. Ct. 903, 89 L. Ed. 2d 1 (1986)

Brief Fact Summary
A third party public interest group filed a complaint with the Respondent, the Public Utilities Commission of California (Respondent), against the Petitioner, the Pacific Gas and Electric Company (Petitioner), seeking access to its billing envelopes as a vehicle to express its own political viewpoints. Petitioner sought appeal, alleging that a mandate to open its property to the use of another was an abrogation of its First Amendment Constitutional Rights.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The owner of private property cannot be compelled to create a forum for alternative viewpoints, merely because he uses his own property to express his own views.

Facts
The Petitioner distributed a newsletter in its monthly billing envelope. The newsletter expressed political views of the company, along with public interest stories and tips regarding energy conservation. In 1980, Toward Utility Rate Normalization (TURN), a public interest group urged the Respondent, to forbid the Petitioner from disseminating the newsletter, or, alternatively, to allow TURN to also use the space to express its views. The Respondent allowed TURN access to the envelopes and the Petitioner appealed. The California Supreme Court denied review, and the United States Supreme Court (Supreme Court) Granted Certiorari.

Issue
The issue in this case is whether the Respondent can require a privately owned company, the Petitioner, to allow a third party to have access to its billing envelopes.

Held
Justice Lewis Powell (J. Powell). Reversed.

Dissent
Judge William Rehnquist (J. Rehnquist) dissented, noting that the right of access to the envelopes does not prevent the Petitioner from disseminating its own ideas, rather it suppresses the ideas of another. J. Rehnquist also notes that a public utility (albeit privately owned) is not a natural person and should not be afforded the same constitutional interest that is given to individuals.

Discussion
The important consideration in this case is the fact that the envelopes, in themselves, were Petitioner’s property. Because Consolidated Edison had already stood for the proposition that Petitioner could use his property as he sees fit, he could not later be compelled to allow another party to also use his property as a vehicle for expression.

