Citation
678 S.W.2d 28, 1984 Tenn. 847

Brief Fact Summary
P brought suit against D seeking compensatory and injunctive relief for breach of a non-compete covenant.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
There is a valid consideration when a non-compete covenant is signed after employment has begun and the employee continues to work for the employer for an appreciable length of time.

Facts
Ingram (D) worked at Central Adjustment Bureau (P), a corporation. D was working for P for one week when P indicated that D must sign a non-compete clause. Initially D objected, but when threatened with termination, he signed. D left P to form Ingram & Associates. Ingram & Associates competed directly with P. P brought suit against D seeking compensatory and injunctive relief for breach of the non-compete covenant. The Chancellor awarded P $80,000 and injunctive relief. The Court of Appeals reversed the Chancellor, holding that the covenants were unenforceable for lack of consideration. P appealed.

Issue
Is there a valid consideration when a non-compete covenant is signed after employment has begun and the employee continues to work for the employer?

Held
Yes. The judgment of the Court of Appeals is reversed and the judgment of the Chancellor is affirmed.

Dissent
P did not present the covenant to D until after employment had begun. At that point the covenants were not the subject of free bargaining. D had little choice but to sign. There was no guarantee that the employee would not be terminated even if he signed the non-compete agreement; the employer furnished no consideration. A valid consideration is not a promotion or increased pay because for an act to constitute a valid consideration for a promise it must have been bargained for and given in exchange for the covenant. The covenant fails for lack of consideration.

Discussion
Although there was no consideration when D, already an employee, signed the covenant, continued employment provided a necessary consideration to make the covenant enforceable.

