Citation
573 A.2d 1235, 1990 D.C. App.

Brief Fact Summary
A.C. was diagnosed with inoperable cancer while pregnant.  Her condition worsened until she was unable to adequately communicate, and a hearing was held to determine if a caesarean section should be performed, during which there was conflicting testimony as to if A.C. would have consented to the operation.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The procedure of substituted judgment must be used to ascertain the wishes of an incompetent patient to submit to treatment unless there are truly extraordinary or compelling reasons for overriding the patient’s wishes.

Facts
A.C. was diagnosed with cancer at the age of thirteen.  She married and became pregnant during a period of remission at twenty-seven.  At approximately twenty-five weeks into the pregnancy, she was diagnosed with an inoperable tumor.  She was asked if she really wanted to have her baby, and said that she did.  Shortly thereafter her condition was deemed terminal, and she agreed to palliative treatment intended to extend her life to at least twenty-eight weeks of pregnancy to increase the potential outcome for the fetus if intervention was necessary.  The treatment presented increased risk for the fetus, but was intended to prolong her life and maintain her comfort.  She said at this point that she thought she still wanted to have the baby.  Her condition quickly deteriorated and she was unable to communicate.  A hearing was held to determine if a caesarean section should be performed.  Testimony established that the fetus had a fifty to sixty percent chance of surviving a caes

Issue
Who has the right to decide the course of medical treatment for a patient near death and pregnant with a viable fetus?

Held
The trial court erred by proceeding to a balancing analysis between the rights of A.C. versus the state without first finding a competent refusal by A.C. to go forward with surgery or without finding through substituted judgment that she would not have consented to surgery.

Dissent
Substantial weight should be given to the rights of the viable unborn child.  If the court determines that the patient would probably opt against a caesarean section, the court should vary the weight given this factor in proportion to the confidence the court has in the accuracy of its conclusion.  The child’s interest in being born with the least degree of impairment should also be considered.

Discussion
The majority notes that family will often be the best source to determine the patient’s value system, but expresses concern that sometimes family members may rely on their own judgments or predilections rather than those of the patient.

