Citation
529 U.S. 598, 120 S. Ct. 1740, 146 L. Ed. 2d 658, 82 FEP Cases 1313 (2000)<br />

Brief Fact Summary
The Supreme Court of the United States (Supreme Court) held that the Commerce Clause does not provide Congress with the authority to enact 42 U.S.C. Section:13981, which provides a federal civil remedy for the victims of gender-motivated violence. The Court also held that the section’s civil remedy was beyond the Section:5 of the Fourteenth Amendment enforcement powers of Congress.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The language and purpose of the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution (Constitution) place certain limitations on the manner in which Congress may attack discriminatory conduct. These limitations are necessary to prevent the Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution from obliterating the Framers’ carefully crafted balance of power between the states and the National Government.

Facts
This case arose from a rape claim brought by Petitioner, Christy Brzonkala (Petitioner), a student at Virginia Polytechnic Institute (Virginia Tech) against two football players enrolled at the university. Petitioner filed a complaint under the Virginia Tech disciplinary system, but one of the accused was not punished and the other’s punishment was eventually suspended. She dropped out of school and sued both men and Virginia Tech in federal district court under 42 U.S.C. Section:13981.

Issue
Whether Congress has authority to enact 42 U.S.C Section:13981 based on Section:5 of the Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution?

Held
No. Every law enacted by Congress must be based on one or more of its enumerated powers in the Constitution. In section II of the opinion, the Chief Justice found no authority for the provision in the Commerce Clause of Article I, section 8, clause 3. Therefore, Congress does not have authority to enact 42 U.S.C Section:13981 based on Section:5 of the Fourteenth Amendment.

Dissent
The remedy is not disproportionate and there is no lack of congruence between the remedy and the violation.

Discussion
This holding has been criticized for improperly constraining Congress’ power to combat systematic discrimination, by holding that Congress does not have authority to enact 42 U.S.C Section:13981 based on Section:5 of the Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitu

