Brief Fact Summary
An arbitration against Mexico (D) for the expropriation of its property was sought by Fireman’s Fund Insurance Company (Fireman’s Fund) (P), a U.S. insurance company which owned debentures issued by a Mexican financial services company.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A taking (which includes destruction) that is permanent and either de jure or de facto, direct or indirect, in the form of a single measure or several measure over time, tangible or intangible property; a substantially complete deprivation of the economic use and enjoyment of the rights to the property; usually a transfer of ownership, but not always; as measured by the effect of the state’s measures, not the underlying intent; as possibly determined by the investor’s reasonable “investment-backed expectations”; and the compensability of which is determined by whether the measure is within the state’s recognized police powers, the public purpose and effect of the measure, the measure’s discriminatory nature, the proportionality between the means used and the goals intended to be realized, and the bona fide nature of the measure.

Facts
An arbitration was pursued against Mexico (D) by Fireman’s Fund Insurance Company (Fireman’s Fund) (P), a U.S. insurance company that owned debentures issued by a Mexican financial service company. Fireman Fund (P) alleged that Mexico (D) expropriated its property. The plaintiff also claimed that the defendant had aided in the purchase of debentures issued at the same time by the same company that were denominated in Mexican pesos and owned by Mexican investors, but turned its back to the purchase of the U.S. dollars owned by Fireman’s Fund (P). Though the tribunal did not  rule in favor of the plaintiff that Mexico (D) expropriated its property, it delineated the contours of what “expropriation” means.

Issue
Can taking (which includes destruction) that is permanent and either de jure or de facto, direct or indirect, in the form of a single measure or several measure over time, tangible or intangible property; a substantially complete deprivation of the economic use and enjoyment of the rights to the property; usually a transfer of ownership, but not always; as measured by the effect of the state’s measures, not the underlying intent; as possibly determined by the investor’s reasonable “investment-backed expectations”; and the compensability of which is determined by whether the measure is within the state’s recognized police powers, the public purpose and effect of the measure, the measure’s discriminatory nature, the proportionality between the means used and the goals intended to be realized, and the bona fide nature of the measure, be classified as elements of expropriation of property under NAFTA?

Held
(Judge not identified in casebook excerpt). Yes. A taking (which includes destruction) that is permanent and either de jure or de facto, direct or indirect, in the form of a single measure or several measure over time, tangible or intangible property; a substantially complete deprivation of the economic use and enjoyment of the rights to the property; usually a transfer of ownership, but not always; as measured by the effect of the state’s measures, not the underlying intent; as possibly determined by the investor’s reasonable “investment-backed expectations”; and the compensability of which is determined by whether the measure is within the state’s recognized police powers, the public purpose and effect of the measure, the measure’s discriminatory nature, the proportionality between the means used and the goals intended to be realized, and the bona fide nature of the measure.

Discussion
For compensation taking by a state of a foreign national’s property to be just as stipulated in the Restatement (Third) of Foreign Relations Law of the United states, it must in the absence of exceptional circumstances, be in an amount equal to the value of the taken property and be paid at the time of the taking, or within a reasonable time thereafter with interest from the date of taking, and in a form economically usable by the foreign national whose property has been taken.

