Brief Fact Summary
The arbitration tribunal awarded the plaintiff money damages and interest after it had determined that Mexico (D) had expropriated Technicas Medioambientales Tecmed S.A.’s (Claimant’s) (P) property by refusing to issue a permit for the operation of a landfill (the “Landfill”) owned by the Claimant’s (P) subsidiary (for the facts of the case and the tribunal’s findings and ruling, (see the brief at page 130, supra). The tribunal did not however award moral damages or litigation expenses and attorney’s fees.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
(1) What constitutes compensatory money damages when awarded for the expropriation of property may include amounts proven to make up the market value of the property as well as amounts for projected increase in revenue and goodwill.

Facts
Mexico (D) was found  by the tribunal to have expropriated Tecnias Mediambientales Tecmed S.A.’s (Claimant’s) (P) property by not issuing a license for the operation of a landfill (the “Landfill”) owned by the Claimant’s (P) subsidiary (for the facts of the case and the tribunal’s findings and ruling, see the brief at page 130, supra). The onus now rested on the tribunal to determine the appropriate damages. The primary request of the Claimant (P) was money damages and secondarily restitution in kind. Request was also for interest, moral damages, litigation expenses and attorney’s fees. The decision the tribunal took was explained in each item.

Issue
(1) Does an amount proven to make up the market value of property as well as amounts for projected increase in revenue and goodwill constitute compensatory money damages when awarded for the expropriation of property?

Held
(1) Yes. What constitutes compensatory money damages when awarded for the expropriation of property may include amounts proven to make up the market value of the property as well as amounts for projected increase in revenue and goodwill. The capital investments and profits for the two years in which the Landfill was operational, the market value of the Landfill was $5,553,017.12 while basing the Landfill acquisition value at $4,028,788.

Discussion
The award of the damages in respect of expropriation or nationalized property, expropriated business on a going concern basis is valued by the tribunal rather than on a liquidation basis and this would include measures of goodwill and profitability in the value determination. Hence, the indicia must be based on reliable data and projections as with other measures of value.

