Citation
527 F.3d 412 (5th Cir. 2008)

Brief Fact Summary
Kadlec Medical Center (Plaintiff) sued Dr. Robert Berry (Defendant), an anesthesiologist and former shareholder/employee of Louisiana Anesthesia Associates (LAA) (Defendant) and Lakeview Medical Center (Lakeview) (Defendant), on the basis that he used narcotics on-duty and nearly caused a patient to die.  Plaintiff claimed that LAA's (Defendant) and Lakeview's (Defendant) referral letters were misleading as they did not disclose Berry's (Defendant) past negligence and addiction to narcotics.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A former employer is liable for misleading referral letters that do not disclose a doctor's past negligence and addiction to narcotics.

Facts
Dr. Berry (Defendant) was a licensed anesthesiologist who practiced with, among others, Drs. William Preau and Mark Dennis at Louisiana Anesthesia Associates (LAA) (Defendant).  From November 2000 until he was terminated on March 13, 2001, Berry (Defendant) was a shareholder of LAA (Defendant), which was the exclusive provider of anesthesia services to Lakeview Medical Center (Lakeview) (Defendant).  In November 2000, Lakeview (Defendant) investigated Berry (Defendant) after nurses expressed concern about his undocumented and suspicious withdrawals of the narcotic Demerol.  The team that investigated found excessive narcotic withdrawals by Berry (Defendant) and missing documentation.  Dennis brought the situation to Berry's (Defendant) attention, however, instead of following the agreement that he would account for his continued narcotic withdrawals, he did not.  Three months later, Berry (Defendant) did not answer a page while on-duty at Lakeview (Defendant) and when discovered, he was found asleep, groggy, and unfit to work.  On March 27, 2001, Dennis and the other partners at LAA (Defendant) fired Berry (Defendant) "for cause."  Although Berry's (Defendant) drug problem and the danger he posed to patients had been recognized, no one reported his impairment to Lakeview's (Defendant) Medical Executive Committee or the Board of Trustees, or to the State Board of Medical Examiners or the National Practitioner's Data Bank.

Issue
Is a former employer liable for misleading referral letters that do not disclose a doctor's past negligence and addiction to narcotics?

Held
(Reavley, J.)  Yes.  A former employer is liable for misleading referral letters that do not disclose a doctor's past negligence and addition to narcotics.  The Plaintiffs allege that the Defendants committed two torts: intentional misrepresentation and negligent misrepresentation.  The elements of a claim for intentional misrepresentation are: (1) a misrepresentation of a material fact; (2) made with intent to deceive; and (3) causing justifiable reliance that results in injury.  To establish a claim for intentional misrepresentation when it is by silence or inaction, plaintiffs must also show that the defendant owed a duty to the plaintiff to disclose the information.  In order to make a claim for negligent misrepresentation: (1) there must be a legal duty on the part of the defendant to supply correct information; (2) there must be a breach of that duty, which can occur by omission or affirmative misrepresentation; and (3) the breach must have caused the plaintiff damages on the basis of the plaintiff's reasonable reliance on the misrepresentation.

Discussion
The key to the Kadlec holding is that when a former employer chooses to provide a referral letter, it creates liability based on any omission that affects a future employer.  LAA (Defendant) would not have been held responsible if it had done as Lakeview (Defendant) in its decision to provide only a minimal letter acknowledging Berry's (Defendant) employment.  The court in Kadlec was no doubt motivated by seemingly impossible recommendations by LAA (Defendant), which the court noted were "false on their face and materially misleading."  One has to wonder why LAA (Defendant) would provide such letters, knowing the issues that led to Berry's (Defendant) termination.

