Citation
482 Pa. 416, 393 A.2d 1175 (1978)<br />

Brief Fact Summary
The Plaintiff, Adler, Barish, Daniels, Levin and Creskoff (Plaintiff) is a law firm. The Defendants, Epstein and others (Defendants) are former salaried associates. The Plaintiffs brought an action for injunctive relief to keep the Defendants from soliciting the Plaintiff’s clients to have the Defendants handle their current legal projects.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Soliciting a law firm’s clients to break their contracts with the firm and hire the solicitor instead is commercial speech not protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution (Constitution). The injured party may find relief in tort.

Facts
The Plaintiff is a law firm. The Defendants were salaried associates of the Plaintiff. The Defendants decided to leave the Plaintiff’s employ and start their own firm. The Defendants met personally with clients whose cases they worked on while in the Plaintiff’s employ. The Defendants told the clients they were leaving the firm and invited them to break their contracts with the Plaintiff and have the Defendants be their attorneys instead. The Defendants also sent a mass mailer out to all the Plaintiff’s current clients that the Defendants had worked for. The mailer included a form to fill out that would break their contract with the Plaintiff and a retention agreement for Defendants’ new firm. The Defendants also took out a $150,000 line of credit at a bank. As security, they listed the value of the work they were doing for the clients as attorneys in Plaintiff’s employ at $500,000. The Plaintiff sued for an injunction, preventing the Defendants from contacting the clients and

Issue
May the Plaintiff find relief in tort?

Held
Yes, on the first count. No, on the second.

Dissent
The Defendants’ activities did not put undue pressure on the clients to choose their services over the Plaintiff. Rather, it gave the clients the option to have the Defendants represent them. Rather, their solicitation gave the clients the chance to make an informed, intelligent decision that the First Amendment of the Constitution is trying to protect.

Discussion
The court’s decision, as opposed to exploring the relationship between the tort of intentional interference with contractual relations and excepted business practice in a competitive market economy, explores the relationship between the tort and the First Amendment constitutional protection of commercial speech.

