Citation
604 F.2d 200, 203 U.S.P.Q. 161, 5 Med. L. Rptr. 1814 (2d Cir. 1979)

Brief Fact Summary
The United States District Court for the Southern District of New York issued preliminary injunctions against the Appellants, Pussycat Cinema, Ltd. and Michael Zaffarano (Appellants), prohibiting them from exhibiting or distributing a motion picture on the grounds of trademark infringement, unfair competition, and dilution of trademark. The Appellants challenged the orders.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
If the design of an item is nonfunctional and has acquired secondary meaning (the power of a name or other configuration to symbolize a particular business, product or company), the design may become a trademark even if the item itself is functional.

Facts
The Appellee, the Dallas Cowboy Cheerleaders Inc. (Appellee), brought an action against the Appellant to enjoin the company from promoting their film Debbie Does Dallas in which the title character, wishing to join the Dallas Cowboy Cheerleaders, engages in a variety of sexual acts to raise money to travel to Dallas to try out for the squad. The Appellee alleges a Lanham Act trademark violation. The trial judge granted a preliminary injunction and the Appellant appealed. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit reviewed.

Issue
Did the Appellee have a valid trademark of the distinctive Dallas Cowboy Cheerleaders’ uniform making the Appellants’ action a violation and thus justifying the injunction?

Held
Yes. The court affirmed the order, holding that the Appellants violated the Dallas Cowboy Cheerleaders’ trademark and an injunction was proper. The Appellee established a probability of success at trial and the confusion engendered by the Appellants’ movie would have resulted in irreparable harm were the Appellants not enjoined from its distribution and exhibition.

Discussion
The central item at issue in this case is the distinct uniform employed by the cheerleading organization and the likelihood of confusion through use of a similar uniform in Debbie Does Dallas. This was essentially a factual issue, which the court characterized in the following manner: “The combination of the white boots, white shorts, blue blouse, and white star-studded vest and belt of Appellee’s uniform was an arbitrary design, which made the otherwise functional uniform a trademark. The depiction of the uniform in a motion picture violated that trademark because the uniform in the movie closely resembled Appellee’s uniform and the public was likely to be confused within the meaning of the Lanham Act.” (The latter is the federal statute governing trademark infringement.) As the court explained, “It is well established that, if the design of an item is nonfunctional and has acquired secondary meaning, the design may become a trademark even if the item itself is functiona

