Citation
497 F.3d 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2007)

Brief Fact Summary
The trial court held Seagate (Defendant) waived its attorney-client privilege and work product protection for in-house, trial, and opinion counsel communications concerning the infringement, invalidity, and enforceability of Convolve patents.  Defendant sought a writ of mandamus to vacate the trial court's orders for document production.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
In order to recover enhanced damages on proof of willful infringement, a patentee must show objective recklessness and a defendant is no longer required by affirmative duty to get a legal opinion before action.

Facts
Convolve, Inc. sued Seagate Technology, LLC (Defendant) for willful violation of several patents.  Just before the lawsuit, Defendant hired opinion counsel, Gerald Sekimura, to provide an evaluation of the Convolve patents.  Sekimura issued three opinion letters.  Defendant notified Convolve of its intent to rely on the opinion letters as a defense, disclosed his work product, and produced him for deposition.  Convolve then moved for disclosure of all counsels' work product, including from the trial counsel.  The trial court held Defendant waived attorney-client privilege concerning infringement, invalidity, and enforceability of Convolve's patents.  It ordered the production of documents and testimony and provided for in camera review of documents regarding trial strategy.  The trial court finally held work product protection was waived.  Defendant moved for a stay and certification of an interlocutory appeal, which was denied by the trial court.  Defendant then petitioned the federal court to order the trial court to vacate its discovery production requirements with a writ of mandamus.  The federal court sua sponte ordered en banc review.

Issue
In order to recover enhanced damages on proof of willful infringement, must a patentee show objective recklessness and does a defendant still have an affirmative duty to get a legal opinion before action?

Held
(Mayer, J.)   Yes and no.  In order to recover enhanced damages on proof of willful infringement, a patentee must show objective recklessness and a defendant is no longer required by affirmative duty to get a legal opinion before action.  A writ of mandamus is appropriate if the party has no other way to get the relief requested and the right of the writ is "clear and indisputable."  Mandamus is appropriate in a discovery dispute about claims of privilege when: (1) an important issue of first impression is raised; (2) a delay until final judgment means the loss of the privilege; (3) immediate resolution avoids doctrine development that would undermine privilege.  This case meets the criteria.  Convolve must show willful infringement to obtain enhanced damages.  The analysis for willful infringement and enhanced damages was set forth in the case of Underwater Devices Inc. v. Morrison-Knudsen Co., 717 F.2d 1380 (Fed. Cir. 1983).  Before starting a potentially infringing action, a potential infringer on actual notice of another's patent rights has the affirmative duty to get legal advice first.  Therefore, the advice of counsel defense developed where alleged infringers claim reliance on legal opinions.  However, in Underwater Devices, "willful" is less strict and closer to negligence than willful in the civil context, and therefore does not comply with Supreme Court precedent.  Underwater Devices is overruled, a showing of objective recklessness is required, and there is no affirmative duty of due care by the alleged infringer.  A duty to obtain legal opinion does not exist.  Convolve argues this opinion is not advisory or hypothetical as it is improper to consider "willfulness" here but instead the proper legal standard informs the scope of discovery.  This Court next considers the attorney-client privilege waiver.  The attorney-client privilege can only be waived by the client and is meant to promote open and direct communication.  The scope of a client's waiver has no bright-line rule.  In this case, the trial counsel and opinion counsel serve very different functions and the Supreme Court saw the need to protect the thoughts and strategy of trial counsel.  Also, in a claim of willfulness, there must be a good faith basis that the pre-filing actions of the alleged infringer was willful infringement.  Therefore, the communications of trial counsel are not relevant to the pre-litigation willfulness.  A motion for preliminary injunction can address a claim of post-litigation willfulness.  Finally, a similar analysis applies to the waiver of work production protection.  In some instances, the waiver may be extended to trial counsel, but the general rule should be that waiver for reliance on opinion counsel work product as a defense to willful infringement is not extended to trial counsel.  Writ granted.

Discussion
This case affected the community of patent litigation because it nullified the affirmative duty to act with due care in willfulness cases.  Before this opinion, defendants would often waive the attorney-client privilege to establish the advice-of-counsel defense and the scope of the waiver was highly litigated.  Now the prosecution of willful infringement is more difficult and the waiver issue less complicated.

