Citation
08-cv-01932 OWW YNP SMS (PC), 2010 BL 75512 (E.D. Cal. Apr. 05, 2010)

Brief Fact Summary
The Defendant, Miller’s (Defendant) conviction for mailing advertisements for “adult” books to unwilling recipients was vacated and remanded in an effort to shift the burden of obscenity determinations to the state and local courts.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
In determining whether speech is obscene, the basic guidelines for the trier of fact must be: (a) whether “the average person, applying contemporary community standards” would find the material, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest of sex, (b) whether the work depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined by the applicable state law, and (c) whether the work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literacy, artistic, political, or scientific value.

Facts
The Defendant was convicted under the California Penal Code for mailing advertisements for “adult” material to non-soliciting recipients.

Issue
Whether state statutes may regulate obscene material without limits?

Held
No. Judgment of the lower court vacated and remanded for further proceedings. In determining whether speech is obscene, the basic guidelines for the trier of fact must be: (a) whether “the average person, applying contemporary community standards” would find the material, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest of sex, (b) whether the work depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined by the applicable state law, and (c) whether the work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literacy, artistic, political, or scientific value. The Supreme Court of the Untied States (Supreme Court) does not adopt as a constitutional standard the “utterly without redeeming social value” test. If a state law that regulates obscene material is thus limited, as written or construed, First Amendment constitutional values are adequately protected by the ultimate power of appellate courts to conduct an independent review of constitutional claims when necess

Dissent
To send men to jail for violating standards that they cannot understand due to vagueness, denies them of due process.

Discussion
This case attempts a new definition and clarification of obscenity while also trying to shift the burden of obscenity determinations to the state and local courts.

