Citation
169 A.D.2d 254, 572 N.Y.S.2d 672, 1991 N.Y. App. Div.

Brief Fact Summary
The Plaintiff, Stambovsky (Plaintiff), brought suit to rescind a contract to buy a house after he discovered the house was purported to be haunted, thus lowering its value.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A condition that impairs the value of property, known to the seller and left undisclosed to the buyer can constitute a basis for rescission of the contract.

Facts
The Plaintiff moved to a new neighborhood where he contracted to buy a house. The Defendants, Ackley and a real estate agency (Defendants), knew the house they had just sold to the Plaintiff was haunted. This was a widely known fact in the area and the house had even received national press attention. After Plaintiff discovered this, he sued for rescission. The trial court dismissed his complaint.

Issue
Whether an undisclosed condition that impairs the value of the property is a basis for rescission of the contract.

Held
Reversed. A house purported to be haunted, which impairs the value of the property and is left undisclosed to the buyer can constitute a basis for rescission of the purchase agreement.

Dissent
The dissent focused on the majority’s discard of the traditional doctrine of caveat emptor. The dissent believed that to discard this doctrine for the reasons cited in the majority opinion (haunted house) was a ridiculous reason to discard the doctrine.

Discussion
The court discussed that New York courts had traditionally followed the rule of caveat emptor, which did not vest a duty of disclosure on the seller for patent defects. The reason the court noted that the doctrine of caveat emptor was being discarded was that in most cases applying caveat emptor, the defect was physical and thus a prudent buyer would most likely discover it. In the case at bar, the condition was created by the seller and was a condition that could not be discovered even under the most rigorous examination of the house.

