Citation
551 U.S. 308 (2007)

Brief Fact Summary
Shareholders (Plaintiff) of Tellabs, Inc. (Tellabs) (Defendant), who filed suit under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (PSLRA) alleging that Tellabs and its officers had purposely mislead investors about the true worth of the company's stock, arguing that they had pled with particularity facts eliciting a "strong inference" that Tellabs and the officers had operated with the obligatory scienter.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
To meet the requirements as "strong'' within the intention of § 21D(b)(2), an implication of scienter must be determined by a reasonable person to be clear and aspersuasive as any contrastingimplication of nonfraudulentintent, under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (PSLRA).

Facts
A class action under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (PSLRA) was filed byshareholders of Tellabs who bought stock over a seven-month period, claiming that Tellabs and the CEO and president of Tellabs at the time, Notebaert, were involved in securities fraud in violation of § 10(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and SEC Rule 10b-5. The shareholdersexplicitly claimed that throughout the seven-month period, Notebaert (an alleged that during the seven-month period, Notebaert, and by insinuation Tellabs, through a series of statements, deceitfully comforted public investors by stating that Tellabs products were still in strong demand and its profits high, when in reality, Notebaert was well aware the converse was true.  After the seven-month period, once the disclosure was made public, that demand for Tellab’s products plummeted considerably with its stock prices going from $67 to a low of $16. The action was dismissed without prejudice by the district court, and the shareholders amended their complaint to include the addition of 27 confidential sources and other fresh, more preciseaccusations, some as to the mental state of Notebaert's, however the district court again dismissed, with prejudice this time, due to discovering the shareholders did not plead scienter with satisfactory particularity. The court of appeals reversed, finding that the prerequisite in PSLRA stating that plaintiffs must "state with particularity facts giving rise to a strong inference that the defendant acted with the required state of mind" had been met. The court of appeals held that as long as the complaint  “allege[d] facts from, which if true, a reasonable person could infer that the defendant acted with the required intent"then the “strong inference" standard would be met. Tellabs appealed, with the Supreme Court granted certiorari.

Issue
To meet the requirements as "strong'' within the intention of § 21D (b)(2), does an implication of scienter have to be determined by a reasonable person to be clear and as persuasive as any contrasting implication of nonfraudulent intent, under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (PSLRA)?

Held
(Ginsburg, J.) Yes. To meet the requirements as "strong'' within the intention of § 21D (b)(2), an implication of scienter must be determined by a reasonable person to be clear and as persuasive as any contrasting implication of nonfraudulent intent, under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (PSLRA).A plaintiff must demonstrate the defendant acted with scienter, "a mental state embracing intent to deceive, manipulate, or defraud” in order to prevail on a claim under § 10(b) of the Securities Act and Rule 10(b)-5.One of Congress’s prime objectives in enacting the PSLRA was setting a uniform pleading standard for § 10(b) actions.PSLRA incorporatesdemanding pleading requirements that necessitate plaintiffs to state with particularity both the facts establishing the purported violation, and the facts verifyingscienter as a check against abusive litigation in private securities actions frauds.  As stated in § 21D (b)(2), plaintiffs must "state with particularity facts giving rise to a strong inference that the defendant acted with the required state of mind” but, Congress failed to define the key term "strong inference.”It is if the court of appeals' formulation of that term is adequate that is the key issue in this case, the answer being it is not due to it failing to  because it does not portray the stricter demand Congress wished to express by its usage of that term. Congress failed to enlighten as to what facts would generate a strong inference or how courts could determine the existence of the requisite inference. Other than its intention to reinforce existing pleading requirements, Congress has not provided any guidance, so the courts of appeals have deviated in interpreting the term "strong inference." One of the doubts is if the term should take into account competing inferences when deciding if an inference of scienter is “strong” so the Court's assignment is to recommend a feasiblecomprehension of the "strong inference" standard that endorses the PSLRA's dual goals of limiting thoughtless, lawyer-driven litigation, and at the same timeconserving investors' aptitude to recover on meritorious claims. The Court determines the ensuingrecommendations: First, as with any motion to dismiss for failure to plead a claim on which relief can be granted, when confronted with a motion to dismiss a § 10(b) action the court must accept all factual accusations in the complaint as true. Second, the complaint must be considered in its entirety by the courts, along with other sources courts usuallyinspected when ruling on motions to dismiss. The question is if all of the facts purported, combined, generate a strong inference of scienter, not if a singular claim, dissected in seclusion, satisfies the standard. Third, the court must consider reasonable contrary inferences in deciding if the pleaded facts generate a “strong” inference of scienter.  The court of appeals explicitly rejected to take part in such a comparative analysis, but Congress instead of simply demanding plaintiffs purport facts from which an inference of scienter could be reasonably obtained, Congress insisted that plaintiffsplead with particularity facts that generate a “strong”, ardent and clear, inference.  A court must take into account reasonable, nonculpable clarifications for the defendant's behavior, as well as inferences supporting the plaintiff when deciding if the plaintiff has purported facts that incite the requisite "strong inference”. The inference that the defendant operated with scienter does not have to beindisputable, but it must be more than simply "reasonable" or "permissible" it must be clear and convincing. Taken like this, the inference is "strong" when compared to other explanations. Tellabs argues Notebaert’s missing financial motive will be dispositive whencompeting inferences are taken into account, as per this formulation. Whilepersonal monetary gain leans towards scienter inference, motive can be a pertinent consideration itsomission is not fatal.  As a result of accusations needing to be taken into account combined, the materiality that can be attributed to a claim of motive, or the omission of motive, relies on the whole of all facts purported. Tellabs also stands by his belief that many of the shareholders’ claims are too confusing or unclear to maintains that several of the shareholders’ allegations are too vague or ambiguous to be a factor in a strong inference of scienter. The court's job is not to analyze every claim individually rather to evaluate all of them together even though omissions and ambiguities are oppositional to inferring scienter. Lastly, the court of appeals was excessivelyapprehensive that a court's comparative evaluation of plausible inferences would encroachon the Seventh Amendment right to jury trial. Congress, as originator of federal statutory claims, Congress has authority to advise what is needs to be pleaded to state the claim, the same way it has authority to decide what must be demonstrated to prevail on the merits. To allow, disallow, or shape § 10(b) private actions, inclusive of proof requirements of pleading and pleading itself, is Congress’ right. No one ever stated that the Seventh Amendment hinders Congress from instituting any pleading perquisites it deems suitable for federal statutory claims and as long as the shareholders have satiated the congressionally "prescribe [d] . . . means of making an issue," the case will be within range of the jury's power to evaluate the integrity of the witnesses, solve actual issues of fact and form the final determination as to if Notebaert, and Tellabs, operated with scienter. The pleading requirement for the shareholder will not be more than would be required to establish at trial.  Under § 10(b) a plaintiff claiming fraud must plead facts creating an inference of scienter as possible as any plausible contrasting inference and once at trial, the plaintiff must then demonstrate the case by proving that it is more probably than not that the defendant operated with scienter, or by a "preponderance of the evidence,.” Vacated and remanded.

Dissent
(Scalia, J.) By stating that an inference that is simply "at least as compelling as any opposing inference" cannot be said to be a "strong inference” is the one key respect where the Court’s test fails.  Rather, the test should be if the contrasting inference of innocence is more plausible than the inference of scienter.

Discussion
On remand, the court of appeals ruled that the accusations in the complaint met the pleading requirements of the PSLRA's. The concept of extracting a "strong inference" from factual claims is not consistent with the predominant exercise of notice pleading, Judge Posner said upon coming to this conclusion. The court must handle the pleaded facts as true and "draw all reasonable inferences in favor of the plaintiff “ even when a plaintiff is required by Rule 9(b) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure to plead facts (like where and when of a purported fraudulent statement). Drawing a "strong inference" in the plaintiff’s favor may appear to imply that the defendant had pleaded facts or offered proof that would, when compared with the claims of the plaintiff’s, permit a conclusion that the plaintiff had a stronger caseand so a prior to hearing from a defendant, a judge could not draw a strong inference in the plaintiff's favor. Clearly not considered by the PLSRA and not vital, comparisons require dismissal prior to the defendant’s response unless a strong inference of scienter is given by the complaint itself.  A defendant generally will provide proof in his defense, so complaints on their face, without reference to the defendant’s case, produces a fragile or bare inference of scienter, signifying that only if there were no defense at all would a plaintiff prevail, would probably fail at some point once the defendant had the opportunity to put on his case, which is usually occur post pretrial discovery. Seemingly, in complex securities-fraud cases like this one, Congress does not believe that weak complaints should put a defendant to the expense of discovery.

