Citation
Cal. Ct. App. 120 Cal. Rptr. 3d 507 (2011)

Brief Fact Summary
Aceves (P) contended that the mortgagee, U.S. Bank, N.A. (U.S. Bank) (D) was promissorily estopped from foreclosing her house after she defaulted on her mortgaged house, basis her reason on the fact that her reliance on U.S. Bank’s (D) promise to work with her to reinstate and modify her loan is now detrimental to her as she forewent the opportunity to save her home by converting a chapter 7 bankruptcy case to a chapter 13 case. But the house was foreclosed without the U.S. Bank ever commencing negotiations toward a possible loan solution.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A chapter 7 bankruptcy case is converted to a chapter 13 case when a mortgagor in default states a claim of promissory estoppel where the mortgagor has, in reliance on the mortgagee’s promise to reinstate and modify the mortgage, foregone the opportunity to save the mortgagor’s home.

Facts
Aceves (P) was unable to pay the mortgage payment on her house which she had mortgaged to a lender, who transferred its entire interest under the mortgage to the U.S Bank (D), N.A. (U.S Bank (D)) (D). Shortly after she defaulted in the payment of her mortgage payment, she filed for bankruptcy protection under chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code which imposed an automatic stay on the foreclosure proceedings. Aceves (P) was told by the U.S Bank (D) after she contacted them that the bank “would work with her on a mortgage reinstatement and loan modification.”  She also complied with the directive of the bank when she was told that she should submit document to the U.S Bank (D) for its consideration.

Issue
does a chapter 7 bankruptcy case which is converted to a chapter 13 case when a mortgagor in default states a claim of promissory estoppel where the mortgagor has, in reliance on the mortgagee’s promise to reinstate and modify the mortgage, foregone the opportunity to save the mortgagor’s home?

Held
(Mallano, J.) Yes. A chapter 7 bankruptcy case is converted to a chapter 13 case when a mortgagor in default states a claim of promissory estoppel where the mortgagor has, in reliance on the mortgagee’s promise to reinstate and modify the mortgage, foregone the opportunity to save the mortgagor’s home. The elements which are necessary for a claim of promissory estoppel are all present and this includes (1) a promise clear with terms which are easy to understand; (2) reliance by the party to whom the promise is made (3) the reliance must be foreseeable and reasonable and (4) there must be injury by her reliance by the party asserting the estoppel.

Discussion
the court ruled in this case that Aceves (P) reliance was both foreseeable and reasonable because the reliance element of promissory estoppel was strong. Scenarios of reliance can either be categorized as foreseeable nor reasonable in a situation whereby a plaintiff’s misguided belief or guileless action results in reliance on a statement on which no reasonable person would rely; the action of the plaintiff in light of her own intelligence and information is manifestly unreasonable; or in a situation where the plaintiff has a mere hopeful expectation. All these instances stated above can be equated with justifiable reliance and no relief will be granted

