Citation
22 Ill.730 F. Supp. 962 (S.D. Ind. 1990)

Brief Fact Summary
Plaintiff Dale R. Horning Co. purchased defective glass products from Defendant Falconer Glass Industries, Inc. resulting in additional costs to Plaintiff for the replacement of the defective products. Plaintiff initiated this cause of action to recover consequential damages incurred from the replacement of the defective products and the resulting delay. Defendant included a provision disclaiming liability for consequential damages on the back of its form.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
An additional term limiting liability for consequential damages in an agreement between merchants will not be enforced when enforcement would result in hardship to the non-assenting party.

Facts
Plaintiff was a subcontractor on a construction project where time was of the essence. If Plaintiff failed to meet deadlines of the project, the result would be daily fines and possible termination. Plaintiff ordered a glass product from Defendant over the telephone. During the telephone conversation, no mention was made of limiting remedies or disclaiming warranties. Defendant had reason to know at the time the order was made of Plaintiff’s general or particular requirements. The day after the telephone conversation, Plaintiff sent Defendant a confirming order form. The form contained nothing about warranties or damages, but did include a handwritten notation that the shipment was on an “as needed” basis. Defendant also sent a form to Plaintiff at the same time. The form indicated that the product was due “3rd Qtr. 1986″ and that four weeks was the manufacturing time. The reverse side of Defendant’s form also limited Plaintiff’s remedy for defective goods to replacement and d

Issue
Is the additional term disclaiming Defendant’s liability for consequential damages part of the contract between the parties?

Held
No. Defendant’s provision disclaiming liability for consequential damages is not part of the contract between the parties.

Discussion
In the present case, the additional term disclaiming Defendant’s liability for consequential damages was not part of the contract between the parties. The Court reasoned that to include this type of provision, located in fine print on the back of the form, and would result in hardship to Plaintiff.

