Citation
Maine Sup. Ct., 962 A.2d 322 (2008). Appeal after remand. 11 A.3d 308 (2011)

Brief Fact Summary
Dows’ (D) daughter, Harvey (P), contended that the Dows’ (D) general promises was to transfer some of their land to her and that the actions of her father, Jeffery Sr. (D), which included the approval of the site of her house, obtaining a building permit for it and building a substantial part of it himself at the same location supported a claim for promissory estoppel which points to the fact that the Dows (D) were promissorily estopped from conveying a deed to a parcel of land on which she had built a house.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
The court must consider the alleged promisor’s conduct as well as any generalized promises the promisor has made when considering a claim of promissory estoppel, in determining if all of the promisor’s actions, taken together, constitute a “promise” to the claimant.

Facts
Harvey (P) and her husband decided to build a house on the Dows’ (D) property. The land on which they built their house had been promised to Harvey (P) and her brother by the Dows’ (D) ever since they were kids that at some point in the future, all or some of the 125 acres of land would be transferred to them. The decision to build this house was however made after Dows (D) granted them permission to do so. The plan of financing the building of the house was initially to utilize the Dows’ (D) home equity line of credit but after the unfortunate death of Harvey’s (P) husband in an accident, Harvey (P) decided to use her late husband’s life insurance proceeds to finance the building of the house.

Issue
does the court considers the alleged promisor’s conduct as well as any generalized promises the promisor had made when considering a claim of promissory estoppel, in determining if all of the promisor’s actions, taken together, constitute a “promise” to the claimant?

Held
(Mead, J.) Yes. The court must consider the alleged promisor’s conduct as well as any generalized promises the promisor has made when considering a claim of promissory estoppel, in determining if all of the promisor’s actions, taken together, constitute a “promise” to the claimant. Promissory estoppel is applicable to promises which are otherwise not binding and is used to enforce such promises to avoid injustice. So, a promise can be deduced to be the prerequisite of a promissory estoppel. On this premise, the court had not erred in ruling that Dows (D) made only generalized promises to Harvey (P) to convey land to her, and that those promises were not binding express promises due to the indefinites as to the primary terms such as identification of a specific parcel size, boundaries and so on. If these were the only action of the Dows (D) then the trial court would have been right in coming to the conclusion that Harvey’s (P) promissory estoppel claim to fail. But this was not the case.

Discussion
The trial court again found for the Dows (D) when the case was remanded. New findings were not made by the trial court but came to the conclusion that the actions of the Dows (D), including their generalized promises, were not sufficient to support a claim of promissory estoppel. The state’s high court while considering the appeal of Harvey (P) again concluded that the trial court had all the facts it needed for a proper promissory estoppel analysis that the trial court erred in its legal conclusion.

