Citation
22 Ill.307 N.J. Super. 461, 704 A.2d 1321 (Super. Ct. App. Div. 1998)

Brief Fact Summary
Plaintiff, Pop’s Cones, Inc., is seeking damages from the Defendant, Resorts International Hotel, Inc., for losses they claim resulted from reliance on promises made by Defendant during lease negotiations.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
A plaintiff may survive a motion for summary judgment on a promissory estoppel claim by presenting evidence allowing a reasonable jury to find that a defendant made a promise with the expectation that a plaintiff would rely on that promise and that a plaintiff did reasonably and detrimentally rely on a defendant’s promise.

Facts
In May or June of 1994, Plaintiff began discussions with defendant regarding the possibility of Plaintiff relocating its business to a location owned by Defendant. The parties specifically discussed a property that at the time was being leased by “The Player’s Club.” Following the initial discussions, Defendant allowed Plaintiff to operate a vending cart free of charge for the summer of 1994 to test how well the business might do in that location. Plaintiff obtained permission from its franchisor for relocation of its business and a representative of the franchisor later visited the Player’s Club location with representatives of Plaintiff Defendant. In August of 1994, Plaintiff drafted a proposal and delivered it to Defendant. In late September 1994, Plaintiff twice contacted Defendant to determine the status of their deal. Plaintiff requested that Defendant decide before October 1, 1994, because Plaintiff would have to give notice to its current landlord. During the second Se

Issue
Can Plaintiff proceed with their suit to recover losses incurred from their reliance on Defendant’s statements?

Held
Yes. Plaintiff has met its prima facie case for promissory estoppel

Discussion
Promissory estoppel requires a clear and definite promise, reasonable expectation that the promisee will rely on the promise, reasonable and detrimental reliance on the promise by the promisee. The requirement that the promise be clear and definite may be relaxed in the interests of avoiding injustice

