Citation
Minn. Sup. Ct., 806 N.W.2d 766 (2011)

Brief Fact Summary
Nine families (Bearder) (Plaintiff) brought suit against the State of Minnesota (State) (Defendant) and its Department of Health over the practice of collecting, using, storing, and disseminating the blood samples and test results of newborns without written informed consent to do so.  The district court granted Defendant's motion to dismiss.  Plaintiff appealed.

Synopsis of Rule of Law
Under Minnesota's Genetic Privacy Act, blood samples are considered "genetic information."

Facts
Minnesota state law allows the screening of newborns for certain metabolic disorders.  This results in the testing of the blood of more than 73,000 children and finding about 100 affected by such disorders each year.  The screening of newborns is done under the authority of the newborn screening statutes, which (1) require the Commissioner of Health to prescribe the manner of testing, recording, and reporting of newborn screening results; (2) require those who perform screenings to inform parents that the blood samples and test results may be kept by the Department of Health; and (3) allow parents to either decline having their infants tested or require the blood samples and test results be destroyed after the screening.

Issue
Under Minnesota's Genetic Privacy Act, are blood samples are considered "genetic information?"

Held
(Meyer, J.)  Yes.  Under Minnesota's Genetic Privacy Act, blood samples are considered "genetic information."  Our first job is to determine whether the blood samples the Department collected and stored are "genetic information," as that term is used in the Genetic Privacy Act, requiring the Department to obtain informed consent prior to using, storing, or disseminating the blood samples that remain following the completed newborn health screening.  Plaintiff argues that the Genetic Privacy Act applies to blood samples because those samples contain information in the form of DNA.  Defendant argues that the Genetic Privacy Act does not apply to blood samples because those samples are treated as biological specimens by the Act, not genetic information.

Dissent
(Anderson, J.)  I concur in part and dissent in part.  I agree with the majority that test results generated by the Department of Health's newborn screening program are "genetic information" subject to the requirements of the Genetic Privacy Act, except to the extent otherwise expressly authorized by law.  I also agree with the conclusion of the majority that the newborn screening statutes provide an express exception to the Genetic Privacy Act only to the extent that the Defendant is authorized to administer newborn screening by testing the samples for heritable and congenital disorders, recording and reporting those test results, maintaining a registry of positive cases for the purpose of follow-up services, and storing those test results as required by federal law.  I concur to the extent that this conclusion applies to newborn screening test results.

Concurrence
(Stras, J.) In my view, the court reaches the correct policy result.  If I were a legislator, I would vote for legislation that would protect blood samples under the Genetic Privacy Act.  However, my role as a judge is not to implement my own policy preferences, but to interpret the law as written.  Here, the court's conclusion that the blood samples are "genetic information" is at odds with the plain and unambiguous language of the Genetic Privacy Act.  The only reasonable reading of the Genetic Privacy Act is that blood samples are "specimens," not "biological information," which means that the protections of the Act do not apply to blood samples because the samples do not qualify as "genetic information."

Discussion
Because the State's (Defendant) Genetic Privacy Act restricts the collection, use, storage, and dissemination of blood samples collected pursuant to the newborn screening statutes, good intentions or even good science does not permit a violation of its provisions.  The protections provided by the Act require written informed consent.  The Bearder court took note of the underlying policy considerations, but strict interpretation of the Act lead to the conclusion of the majority that no exception was possible.  In this case, the court was offering guidance to the Legislature to fix the issue and make it clear what is protected and what can be used for scientific research.

